Title: Learning Human Health and Diseases from 24-hour Wrist Movement

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.29494v1

Published Time: Tue, 01 Sep 2026 01:02:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 55

Markdown Content:
# Learning Human Health and Diseases from 24-hour Wrist Movement 

Yong Wang 1,2∗† , Dylan McGagh 3,4,5, Katya Broomberg 3,6, Zizheng Zhang 3,5,6,Jonathan Carter 7, Junayed Naushad 8, Laura Brocklebank 3,6, Yang Sun 3,9,George Nicholson 3,9, Dianjianyi Sun 10 ,11 ,12 , Canqing Yu 10 ,11 ,12 , Jun Lv 10 ,11 ,12 ,Maxim Barnard 6, Hubert Lam 6, Andrew Steptoe 13 , David W. Eyre 3,5,6,Liming Li 10 ,11 ,12 , Zhengming Chen 6, Naomi Wray 1,2, Spiros Denaxas 14 ,15 ,16 ,17 ,Gary S. Collins 18 ,19 , Huaidong Du 6, Aiden Doherty 2,3,6∗‡ , Hang Yuan 3,6∗†‡ 

> 1

Department of Psychiatry, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 

> 2

Pioneer Centre for SMARTbiomed, Oxford, UK. 

> 3

Big Data Institute, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 

> 4

Nuffield Department of Orthopaedics, Rheumatology and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 

> 5

Oxford University Hospitals, Oxford, UK. 

> 6

Nuffield Department of Population Health, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 

> 7

Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 

> 8

Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 

> 9

Department of Statistics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. 

> 10

Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing, China. 

> 11

Peking University Center for Public Health and Epidemic Preparedness and Response, Beijing, China. 

> 12

Key Laboratory of Epidemiology of Major Diseases (Peking University), Ministry of Education, Beijing, China. 

> 13

Department of Behavioural Science and Health, University College London, London, UK. 

> 14

Institute of Health Informatics, University College London, London, UK. 

> 15

Interdisciplinary Transformation University (ITU), Linz, Austria. 

> 16

NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at University College London Hospitals (UCLH) NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. 

> 17

National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece. 

> 18

Department of Applied Health Sciences, School of Health Sciences, College of Medicine and Health, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. 

> 19

National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre: Birmingham, University Hospitals Birmingham NHS Foundation Trust and University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. 

> ∗

Corresponding authors. Emails: yong.wang@psych.ox.ac.uk; aiden.doherty@ndph.ox.ac.uk; hang.yuan@ndph.ox.ac.uk. 

> †

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

> ‡

These authors jointly supervised this work. 

1arXiv:2608.29494v1 [cs.LG] 30 Aug 2026 Abstract 

Much of human health and function unfolds beyond the clinic, through the movements of everyday life. Wrist-worn accelerometers capture these movements continuously, yet their rich signals are often reduced to a small set of predefined behavioural summary measures. Here, we present Sensori, a self-supervised foundation model that learns general-purpose health representations directly from 24 hours of raw tri-axial wrist movement. We devel-oped and evaluated the model across four population-based cohorts from the United King-dom, China and the United States, comprising 122,640 participants contributing 683,617 person-days of free-living recordings. Sensori condensed each day of movement into a representation that captured diverse movement behaviours, demographic characteristics, health axes and physical function. Evaluation in independent cohorts showed that these representations generalised across populations and measurement settings without retrain-ing. When added to common clinical covariates, Sensori significantly improved prevalent disease classification for 52 of 102 eligible conditions (median delta AUROC, 0.060; range, 0.012–0.242) and incident disease risk prediction for 26 of 87 eligible conditions (median delta Uno’s C-index, 0.064; range, 0.025–0.172), with the largest gains for neurological and psychiatric disorders. These findings establish 24-hour wrist movement as a rich and scal-able source of health information, with the potential to support passive health monitoring and disease prediction at population scale. 

2Introduction 

Human bipedalism freed the upper limbs from locomotion [1]. This evolutionary transition transformed the hands into the primary interface through which humans interact with their environment. Nearly every aspect of daily life, including eating, working and caregiving, is expressed through coordinated hand and wrist movements. Consequently, a 24-hour recording of wrist movement provides a continuous window into how an individual lives and functions in the real world. The widespread adoption of wrist-worn accelerometers has made continuous measurement of 24-hour movement increasingly accessible. As of 2026, approximately one in three online adults worldwide owns a smartwatch capable of continuously capturing wrist movement [2]. Wrist-worn accelerometers have also been deployed in large-scale population-based cohorts, enabling the study of associations between free-living movement behaviours and diverse health outcomes [3–7]. Human behaviour is continuous, hierarchical and multidimensional, spanning temporal scales from second-level movement dynamics to daily behavioural routines. Device-measured be-haviour has substantially refined our understanding of the associations between physical activ-ity and health, revealing stronger links with longevity than those estimated from self-reported measures [8]. Recent studies have further linked wrist-derived movement behaviours with mor-tality and a broad range of chronic diseases, including cancer, cardiovascular and neurological disorders [7, 9–11]. However, these studies have largely relied on a limited set of already known behavioural summary measures, such as activity intensity, step counts and sleep duration, rather than modelling 24-hour wrist movement as a continuous behavioural time series. As a re-sult, much of the temporal organisation and behavioural context embedded in daily movement remains unexplored. Meanwhile, healthcare systems are aiming to transition towards personalised, preventive and home-based care, creating growing demand for objective measures that characterise health continuously in everyday life. Passive wearable sensing is expected to play a central role in this transition, with wrist-worn accelerometers particularly well suited owing to their low cost, ease of use, widespread adoption and ability to capture free-living behaviour at scale. This direction is increasingly reflected in national healthcare strategies, including the United Kingdom’s commitment to integrate wearable technologies into routine care by 2035 [12, 13]. Realising this vision, however, requires methods that can transform continuous behavioural measurements into clinically meaningful representations of health and disease. Self-supervised learning has underpinned recent advances in modelling complex biosignals, including glucose [14], cardiac activity [15, 16], sleep [17] and gait [18], proving its ability to uncover clinically informative features from large amounts of unlabelled data. Here, we introduce Sensori, a movement foundation model trained through self-supervision on 24-hour wrist movement. By modelling a complete 24-hour recording of raw tri-axial wrist acceleration directly, Sensori captures temporal information that is not represented by coarse predefined behavioural summaries. We show that its learned representations characterise health state and physical function across diverse assessment tasks, generalise to independent cohorts without retraining, and improve disease prediction for conditions with movement-related phenotypes. These findings establish continuous wrist movement as a rich, general-purpose signal for mea-suring health and disease in everyday life. 3Learning health representations from 24-hour wrist movement 

A full day of tri-axial wrist movement contains information about an individual’s health and disease status across multiple temporal scales. Local movement patterns, such as wrist tremor and gait asymmetry, can indicate neurological disorders, whereas longer-term patterns, such as prolonged physical inactivity and episodes of restless sleep, can reflect underlying health conditions. Sensori is a deep neural network that integrates these multiscale signals from a full-day recording into a day-level health representation. This representation supports diverse downstream tasks, including health-state monitoring, physical function assessment and disease prediction (Fig. 1a). At a sampling frequency of 10 Hz, a 24-hour recording contains 864,000 observations per axis, yielding a sequence substantially longer than the typical inputs used by existing movement models. To process sequences of this length, Sensori uses a multiscale architecture in which pooling operations progressively reduce the temporal resolution. A convolutional encoder first produces one embedding vector per minute. Mean pooling then generates five-minute embeddings, which are passed to a transformer to model temporal dependencies across the day. A second mean-pooling operation over the transformer outputs produces a 768-dimensional day-level representation (Fig. 1b, left). Sensori is pretrained using two complementary objectives designed to capture movement pat-terns at different temporal scales: masked reconstruction and day-level contrastive learning. We selected this combination after systematically evaluating alternative pretraining strategies (Supplementary Fig. 1 and Supplementary Tables 1–3). For masked reconstruction, a random subset of the five-minute embeddings provided to the transformer is masked, and the model reconstructs these embeddings from the remaining inputs, thereby learning contextual rela-tionships among movement segments within a day. Day-level contrastive learning encourages representations from different days recorded from the same individual to be more similar to each other than to representations from different individuals, promoting the capture of movement characteristics that are stable across days (Fig. 1b, right). Our study draws on four population-based cohorts from the United Kingdom, China and the United States: the UK Biobank (UKB) [3], the China Kadoorie Biobank (CKB) [4], the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA) [19] and the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) [5, 6]. Each participant wore a wrist-worn accelerometer for up to seven days in UKB, CKB and NHANES, and up to eight days in ELSA. After quality control, 122,640 participants contributed 683,617 person-days of wrist accelerometer recordings: 94,089 from UKB, 20,626 from CKB, 3,320 from ELSA and 4,605 from NHANES (Supplementary Figs. 2– 5). Participants in all cohorts except NHANES had a median age above 60 years; females outnumbered males, and median body mass index (BMI) was at least 24.3 𝑘𝑔 /𝑚 2. Device-measured movement behaviours also differed across cohorts. CKB participants were the most active (median daily step count, 10 ,105; 25th–75th percentiles, 7 ,306–13 ,165) and had the shortest sleep duration (median, 6 .03 hours; 25th–75th percentiles, 5 .23–6 .80 hours), whereas UKB participants were the second most active (median daily step count, 7 ,938; 25th–75th percentiles, 6 ,007–10 ,126) and had the longest sleep duration (median, 6 .86 hours; 25th–75th percentiles, 6 .24–7 .42 hours). Cohort-specific study periods, accelerometry protocols and population characteristics are provided in Table 1. The pretraining dataset comprised approximately 80% of participants from UKB and CKB 4(𝑛 = 91 ,037), providing 502,823 person-days of accelerometer recordings. The remaining 20% of participants from UKB and CKB, together with all eligible participants from ELSA and NHANES ( 𝑛 = 31 ,603), were reserved for downstream evaluation and provided 180,794 person-days of recordings (Fig. 1c, left). Health-state monitoring was evaluated in all four studies, whereas physical function assessment was evaluated in UKB, ELSA and NHANES (Supplementary Tables 4–7). Disease-related tasks were evaluated only in UKB because disease phenotyping required the harmonisation of multiple data sources and incident disease risk prediction required longitudinal follow-up (Fig. 1c, right). Throughout this study, we primarily used the mean and standard deviation of acceleration as benchmarks because they are direct measures of movement intensity. For health evaluation and disease-risk prediction, we also included broader sets of device-measured movement behaviours commonly used in wearable applications. Because these measures are subject to greater mea-surement error, acceleration statistics provide a more readily interpretable benchmark [20–22]. 

Capturing diverse movement behaviours 

A general representation of 24-hour wrist movement should preserve behaviourally relevant information across temporal scales. Accordingly, we first evaluated Sensori’s minute-level embeddings on four external human activity recognition benchmarks: PAMAP2 [23], Real-World [24], WISDM [25] and CAPTURE-24 [26] (Supplementary Tables 8–9). Using linear probing, we compared Sensori with five baselines: handcrafted features; two general-purpose time-series foundation models, MOMENT [27] and Chronos-2 [28]; and two domain-specific models, Bio-PM [29] and Harnet [30]. Although Sensori was not specifically designed for human activity recognition, its minute-level embeddings ranked first in mean Cohen’s 𝜅 on PAMAP2 (mean 𝜅 , 0.852; standard deviation (s.d.), 0.077) and RealWorld (mean 𝜅 , 0.824; s.d., 0.026), and second on WISDM (mean 𝜅 , 0.807; s.d., 0.081) and CAPTURE-24 (mean 

𝜅 , 0.826; s.d., 0.012) in five-fold participant-wise cross-validation (Fig. 2a). On the latter two datasets, Sensori was surpassed only by Harnet, our previous model developed for human activity recognition. Corresponding macro F1 scores are reported in Supplementary Fig. 6a. Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) plots of Sensori’s minute-level em-beddings showed separation among activities with distinct movement intensities and patterns under both structured and free-living conditions (Fig. 2b and Supplementary Fig. 6b). De-tails of data preprocessing and method implementation for these benchmarks are provided in Supplementary Note 3.1. At the 24-hour scale, we next evaluated whether Sensori embeddings captured diverse movement behavioural traits across populations, spanning six commonly used physical-activity measures, five step measures and seven sleep measures [20–22]. Definitions of these traits are provided in Supplementary Table 10. Linear probes were fitted in the UKB training set and evaluated without refitting across four sets: the held-out UKB and CKB test sets, ELSA and NHANES. We compared the performance of Sensori embeddings with that of a demographic baseline comprising age, sex and BMI. Across all cohorts, Sensori embeddings outperformed the demographic baseline in predicting device-measured behavioural traits and device statistics (Fig. 2c). Pearson’s 𝑟 ranged from 0.02 to 0.48 for the demographic baseline and from 0.38 to 0.95 for Sensori, indicating that the embeddings captured information about movement behaviours beyond that available from age, sex and BMI alone. Because the idle sleep mode of the NHANES accelerometer suppresses the 5low-movement information needed to reliably derive sleep-related traits, we did not evaluate sleep traits in this cohort. The corresponding 95% confidence intervals (CIs) are provided in Supplementary Table 11. 

Encoding key demographic characteristics and multidimensional health axes 

Beyond conventional movement behaviours, daily movement patterns may reflect broader inter-individual differences in demographic and health characteristics. We therefore tested whether these characteristics could be inferred from Sensori representations across cohorts. Linear probes were fitted in the UKB training set and evaluated without refitting in the held-out UKB and CKB test sets and in ELSA and NHANES. Sex was evaluated as a binary classification task, whereas age and BMI were evaluated as regression tasks. For comparison, we fitted the same linear models using the mean and standard deviation of acceleration. Sensori embeddings accurately classified sex and generalised well across cohorts, achieving an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.996 in UKB, 0.969 in CKB, 0.988 in ELSA and 0.976 in NHANES (Fig. 3a). The embeddings were also predictive of age and, to a lesser extent, BMI. Pearson’s 𝑟 values for age and BMI were 0.837 and 0.733, respectively, in UKB; 0.765 and 0.511 in CKB; 0.846 and 0.710 in ELSA; and 0.677 and 0.596 in NHANES. By contrast, models using only the mean and standard deviation of acceleration showed substantially lower performance: AUROC ranged from 0.536 to 0.635 for sex, whereas Pearson’s 𝑟 ranged from 0.291 to 0.427 for age and from 0.092 to 0.283 for BMI. The corresponding 95% CIs are provided in Supplementary Table 12. We next tested whether health-related information encoded by Sensori transferred across co-horts. Smoking status, alcohol drinking status and self-rated health were harmonised across UKB, ELSA and NHANES (Fig. 3b). These traits were selected for their relevance to health and availability in all three cohorts. For each trait, linear probes were fitted only in the UKB training set and applied without refitting to the held-out UKB test set, ELSA and NHANES. We compared three models: a demographic baseline comprising age, sex and BMI; a second model combining the demographic variables with the mean and standard deviation of acceleration; and a third model combining the demographic variables with the day-level Sensori embeddings. Sensori achieved the highest AUROC for all nine cohort–trait combinations. Improvement was particularly consistent for smoking status, with AUROCs of 0.833 (95% CI, 0.821–0.844) in UKB, 0.913 (95% CI, 0.895–0.932) in ELSA and 0.844 (95% CI, 0.830–0.858) in NHANES. These consistent improvements suggest that health-related information captured from 24-hour wrist movement is preserved across cohorts. For the cohort-specific evaluations, protocols differed according to the available health axes and physical function items. Probes for the ten UKB health axes were fitted in the UKB training set and evaluated in the held-out UKB test set. The ELSA and NHANES physical function items, which are commonly used to assess limitations in daily activities, were evaluated separately using within-cohort five-fold cross-validation. Across all items, AUROC estimates were higher for Sensori than for both comparator models (Fig. 3c). The highest mean AUROC values were observed for mobility-related activities, including walking 100 yards in ELSA (mean, 0.885; s.d., 0.013) and walking between rooms in NHANES (mean, 0.852; s.d., 0.005). Notably, the predictive signal extended beyond mobility to activities such as preparing meals (mean, 0.828; 6s.d., 0.023) and attending social events (mean, 0.828; s.d., 0.014) in NHANES. These findings indicate that 24-hour wrist movement captures information about both physical capacity and its expression in everyday function. 

Stability of Sensori representations 

We next examined the stability of Sensori representations across recording days and the addi-tional information gained by aggregating multiple days. In the held-out UKB test set, we com-puted pairwise cosine similarities between day-level embeddings from different days within the same participant, between weekday and weekend days within the same participant, and between days from different participants. Day-level embeddings were substantially more similar within than between participants (Fig. 4a). Similarities were comparable across all within-participant day pairs (median, 0.941; 25th–75th percentiles, 0.929–0.952) and weekday–weekend pairs (median, 0.938; 25th–75th percentiles, 0.923–0.950), but markedly lower between participants (median, 0.614; 25th–75th percentiles, 0.583–0.641). Despite this within-participant stability, we found that aggregating additional recording days improved downstream health prediction. We evaluated linear probes using cumulative averages of each participant’s first one through six valid day-level embeddings. Predictive performance improved across all downstream tasks as the number of input days increased (Fig. 4b). The health-axis curve represents the unweighted mean across the ten axes; individual trajectories are shown in Supplementary Fig. 7a. Gains were generally largest between one and two input days and diminished as the number of days increased. One exception was sex classification, for which performance was already near-perfect with a single input day (AUROC = 0.995). Although the magnitude of improvement varied by task, the overall pattern indicated that multi-day recordings contained predictive information beyond that available from a single 24-hour recording. Finally, we compared Sensori with a comprehensive set of conventional behavioural traits derived from wrist accelerometry. The daily traits spanned physical activity, step and sleep, as introduced in Fig. 2c. To provide a more stringent comparison, we additionally derived hour-of-day summaries of these traits where available and evaluated the daily and hourly traits separately and in combination. Conventional behavioural traits improved downstream performance over a baseline using the mean and standard deviation of acceleration, and incorporating hourly information generally provided further gains; however, the combined daily and hourly traits remained less predictive than Sensori embeddings (Fig. 4c). Across the ten health axes, the mean AUROC improvement relative to the acceleration baseline was 0.026 for the combined daily and hourly traits and 0.048 for Sensori embeddings. Results for the individual health axes are provided in Supplementary Fig. 7b. 

Disease prediction 

Having established that Sensori encodes diverse behavioural traits and health variation, we examined whether these representations also captured signals of prevalent disease and future disease risk in the UKB test set. Outcomes were defined using a combination of self-reported information, primary care records and hospital records and harmonised using the pomegranate and CALIBER phenotyping frameworks [31, 32]. Case counts for each condition are reported in Supplementary Table 13. We included conditions with at least 60 cases in each analysis. The 7number of prevalent cases ranged from 60 to 48,019, with a median of 373, whereas the number of incident cases ranged from 60 to 9,084, with a median of 288. For both tasks, we used a clinical covariate model comprising age, sex, BMI, ethnic background, alcohol consumption and smoking status as the baseline. Acceleration features or fine-tuned Sensori embeddings (Supplementary Table 14) were then added to these clinical covariates (Methods). For prevalent disease classification, adding Sensori embeddings to the clinical covariate model significantly improved AUROC for 52 of 102 eligible conditions across the six disease categories and significantly reduced AUROC for three (Supplementary Table 15). The proportion of conditions with significant improvements was highest for neurological (9 of 11) and psychiatric conditions (8 of 10), followed by musculoskeletal (12 of 21), respiratory (7 of 15), cardiovascular (13 of 35) and endocrine conditions (3 of 10). The largest improvements were observed for multiple sclerosis (delta AUROC, 0.242; 95% CI, 0.174–0.308), essential tremor (delta AUROC, 0.240; 95% CI, 0.135–0.345), Parkinson’s disease (delta AUROC, 0.223; 95% CI, 0.143–0.298), schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders (delta AUROC, 0.220; 95% CI, 0.108–0.326) and bipolar affective disorder and mania (delta AUROC, 0.199; 95% CI, 0.129–0.273). For 6-year incident disease risk prediction, adding Sensori embeddings significantly improved Uno’s concordance index (C-index) for 26 of 87 eligible conditions, with no significant reduc-tions (Supplementary Table 15). Significant improvements were most frequent for psychiatric (7 of 7), neurological (3 of 7), musculoskeletal (6 of 19), respiratory (4 of 15), endocrine (2 of 8) and cardiovascular conditions (4 of 31). The largest improvements were observed for Parkin-son’s disease (delta C-index, 0.172; 95% CI, 0.102–0.241), essential tremor (delta C-index, 0.171; 95% CI, 0.077–0.279), spondylolisthesis (delta C-index, 0.116; 95% CI, 0.058–0.182), depression (delta C-index, 0.114; 95% CI, 0.047–0.178) and alcohol problems (delta C-index, 0.102; 95% CI, 0.051–0.154). We further evaluated Sensori alongside models incorporating conventional accelerometry-derived information. We first added the mean and standard deviation of acceleration to the clinical covariate model. For every condition showing a significant improvement relative to the clinical covariate model alone, Sensori retained a higher point estimate (Fig. 5a,b). Across all eligible conditions, Sensori showed significant improvements in AUROC for 47 of 102 conditions and significant reductions for four in prevalent disease classification. For incident disease risk prediction, Sensori showed significant improvements in Uno’s C-index for 23 of 87 conditions, with no significant reductions (Supplementary Table 15). Among the 81 conditions evaluated in both tasks, Sensori had higher point estimates in both tasks for 19 conditions, in prevalent disease classification only for 25 and in incident disease risk prediction only for three; estimates were not higher for either task in the remaining 34 conditions (Supplementary Fig. 8). We then compared Sensori with a model combining the clinical covariates with the 18 device-measured behavioural traits shown in Fig. 2c. For prevalent disease classification, Sensori showed significant improvements in AUROC for 47 conditions and significant reductions for two. For incident disease risk prediction, significant improvements in Uno’s C-index were observed for 22 conditions, with no significant reductions (Supplementary Table 15). Condition-specific results for all models are shown in Supplementary Figs. 9 and 10. 8Discussion 

To our knowledge, this study is the first to show that a representation learned from 24-hour wrist movement alone can capture diverse dimensions of health and disease and generalise across four population-based cohorts from the United Kingdom, China and the United States. Previ-ous studies have linked conventional device-measured behavioural traits, such as time spent at different activity intensities [9] and step counts [7], to a broad range of chronic diseases and mortality. Building on these studies, our work shows that machine-learned movement repre-sentations capture information spanning personal characteristics, physical function, prevalent disease and future disease risk. Our findings highlight the potential of such representations to provide scalable, objective assessments of behaviour and physical function, reducing reliance on self-report and its associated biases and data-collection burden, and to identify individuals at increased risk of future disease, with implications for earlier intervention and prevention. Recent systems integrating large language models with wearable and other personal health data, such as Fitbit Coach [33] and ChatGPT Health [34], reflect growing interest in personalised dig-ital health tools. However, wearable data are typically represented using predefined behavioural summaries that may omit information contained in raw movement signals. Therefore, machine-learned movement representations like Sensori could complement language-model-based health systems by providing more informative representations derived directly from raw wrist move-ment data. Future work should investigate whether such systems can integrate learned sensor representations as an additional modality, analogous to the integration of visual representations in vision–language models [35]. For prevalent disease classification, Sensori produced large improvements when added to the clinical baseline, particularly for neurological and psychiatric conditions, including Parkinson’s disease, multiple sclerosis and essential tremor. Digital measures such as average accelera-tion [36] and, more recently, the 95th percentile of stride velocity [37] have been used in clinical trials to monitor disease progression and treatment response. However, developing and validat-ing a sensitive digital biomarker separately for each condition is time-consuming. Sensori could provide a general-purpose representation for screening movement signals during endpoint dis-covery, identifying conditions for which wearable data are likely to provide sensitive measures before disease-specific biomarkers are developed. Sensori also improved incident disease risk prediction, with the largest gains observed for neurological and psychiatric diseases. Improvements in other categories were more modest, possibly because behavioural risk factors influence disease through indirect pathways rather than acting as proximal markers of pathology [38]. For disease risk prediction, a recent proteomic study in UKB reported that adding sparse protein signatures to clinical models improved 10-year risk prediction for 67 of 218 eligible diseases, with a median increase in Harrell’s C-index of 0.07 [39]. In our study, Sensori improved 6-year risk prediction for 26 of 87 conditions, with a median increase in Uno’s C-index of 0.064. Although these results are not directly comparable, this comparison provides context for the magnitude of Sensori’s gains relative to those achieved with proteomic profiling and highlights wrist movement as a non-invasive, scalable modality for population-level risk stratification. Several limitations should be considered. First, although ELSA and NHANES were designed to provide nationally representative samples, UKB and CKB are susceptible to healthy-volunteer bias. Frailer individuals and those with severe disease, multimorbidity or heterogeneous clin-9ical presentations may consequently be underrepresented. Evaluation in clinically ascertained populations will be needed to establish generalisability across the full spectrum of health and disease. Second, disease analyses were restricted to UKB because comparable cohorts with longitudinal follow-up were unavailable and disease phenotypes are difficult to harmonise across coding systems. The recently collected accelerometry data in CKB could provide an impor-tant opportunity for external validation once sufficient follow-up has accrued. Third, many conditions, particularly neurological diseases, have prodromal periods extending over several years. Our analyses may therefore reflect undiagnosed or prodromal disease rather than risk before disease onset [40]. Landmark analyses progressively excluding cases recorded during the early years of follow-up will be important in future work. Finally, Sensori was developed using acceleration signals alone, whereas modern wearable devices can simultaneously capture movement alongside multiple physiological signals. Such multimodal wearable measurements were not consistently available at a comparable scale across the cohorts considered here. In-corporating additional sensor modalities could further enrich the learned representations and capture complementary dimensions of health and disease. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that 24-hour wrist movement is information-rich and readily obtainable. Our findings show that learned representations of these signals capture di-verse behavioural traits, demographic characteristics, health axes, physical function and disease status. When appropriately used and combined with other home-based measurements, wrist movement monitoring could unlock more accessible, precise and preventive care at scale. 

# Methods 

Data sources 

We used raw tri-axial wrist-worn accelerometer data from four population-based cohorts and four human activity recognition benchmark datasets. The cohort studies were conducted in the United Kingdom, China and the United States: the UK Biobank (UKB) [3], the China Kadoorie Biobank (CKB) [4], the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA) [19] and the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) [5, 6]. The human activ-ity recognition benchmark datasets were PAMAP2 [23], RealWorld [24], WISDM [25] and CAPTURE-24 [26]. All cohort studies followed broadly similar accelerometry protocols. Par-ticipants wore a research-grade wrist-worn accelerometer continuously for seven consecutive days in UKB, CKB and NHANES and for eight consecutive days in ELSA. For both UKB and CKB, data were partitioned at the participant level into training (80%) and test (20%) sets. The partitioning strategy differed by cohort. In UKB, we partitioned geographically to evaluate spatial generalisation. Participants attending assessment centres south of latitude 54 .50 ◦ and east of longitude −2.98 ◦ formed the training set, covering most of England. Participants from the Newcastle and Middlesbrough assessment centres, together with all participants from Scotland and Wales, formed the test set. CKB was split randomly because assessment-centre information was unavailable. Data from ELSA and NHANES, together with all human activity recognition benchmark datasets, were reserved for external test sets and did not contribute to pretraining. The UKB study was approved by the National Health Service (NHS) Research Ethics Service (Ref. 11/NW/0382). The CKB movement enhancement was approved by the Chinese Academy 10 of Medical Sciences-Fuwai Hospital/Peking Union Medical College, Ethical Committee (Bei-jing, China, Ref. 2018-1127) and the Tropical Research Ethics Committee at the University of Oxford (UK, 2019, 18–19). The ELSA accelerometry enhancement was approved by the South Central Berkshire Research Ethics Committee (Ref. 21/SC/0030). The NHANES study was approved by the National Center for Health Statistics Research Ethics Review Board (Protocol #2011-17). 

Accelerometry preprocessing 

Raw tri-axial accelerometer data were processed using actipy [41], an open-source Python toolkit developed by the OxWearables group. Signals were clipped to ±3 g, calibrated to local gravity, low-pass filtered with a cut-off frequency of 5 Hz and downsampled to 10 Hz, balancing predictive performance against computational cost [42]. Days with fewer than 22 hours of wear time, failed calibration, extreme acceleration values or more than ten interruptions were excluded. Participant inclusion diagrams for all cohorts are provided in Supplementary Figs. 2–5. 

Sensori network 

Our Sensori architecture was adapted from wav2vec 2.0 [43] for continuous wrist movement signals. The model comprised a one-dimensional convolutional feature encoder followed by a transformer backbone, which integrated local movement patterns over time into whole-day behavioural representations. Each input comprised 24 hours of tri-axial wrist-acceleration signals sampled at 10 Hz. The convolutional encoder consisted of seven one-dimensional convolutional layers with 512 channels, kernel sizes [10, 3, 3, 3, 2, 2, 2] and strides [5, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2]. Mean pooling reduced the encoded sequence to 288 five-minute embeddings, which were passed to the transformer. The transformer backbone comprised eight layers with 12 attention heads, a hidden dimension of 768 and learnable relative positional encodings. A 768-dimensional day-level embedding was obtained by mean pooling the 288 transformer outputs. Unless otherwise stated, all results were obtained using the 40-million-parameter model. We also evaluated smaller (20 million parameters) and larger (80 million parameters) variants and found that the 40-million-parameter model provided the best trade-off between predictive performance and computational efficiency. Details of the model architecture are specified in Supplementary Table 1. 

Pretraining 

We employed two complementary pretraining objectives: masked reconstruction [44] and participant-level contrastive learning [45]. Together, these objectives encouraged the model to capture both within-day temporal structure and stable behavioural characteristics across repeated observations of the same individual. This combined pretraining strategy was selected following systematic comparison with alternative strategies, including single-task objectives and instance-level contrastive learning (Supplementary Note 1.2). Masked reconstruction was performed at the five-minute embedding level. We randomly masked 50% of the 288 five-minute embeddings after the convolutional encoder and first mean-pooling layer, before they were passed to the transformer. Mask spans of up to two consecutive 11 embeddings were sampled independently and allowed to overlap. The model was trained to maximise the similarity between the transformer output and the corresponding target embedding produced by the convolutional encoder at each masked position using the information noise-contrastive estimation (InfoNCE) loss [45]. For each masked position, 30 negative embeddings were sampled from the same 24-hour recording. The contrastive objective was applied to day-level embeddings. In each mini-batch, a positive pair was formed for each individual from two randomly selected days; negative pairs were formed from days belonging to different individuals. Each mini-batch contained 54 individuals. Hyperparameters were selected empirically rather than through systematic optimisation owing to computational constraints. After quality control, the pretraining dataset comprised 502,823 person-days of accelerometer recordings from 91,037 individuals in the UKB and CKB training sets. The 40-million-parameter Sensori network was pretrained for 300 epochs on three NVIDIA A100 GPUs (80 GB memory each) using the AdamW optimiser [46] with a cosine learning rate scheduler and linear warm-up (learning rate, 4 × 10 −5). Reconstruction loss alone was used for the first 250 epochs, by which point the within-day representations had stabilised. The contrastive objective was then introduced for the remaining 50 epochs. This delayed optimisation reduced overfitting arising from the limited number of repeated observations available for each participant. Three data augmentations were applied during pretraining to increase representation diversity: signal scaling, in which each channel was multiplied by a random scalar sampled from N ( 1, 0.1);channel swapping, in which the three accelerometer axes were randomly permuted; and random start time, in which each training sample comprised a randomly selected 24-hour window from an individual’s continuous recordings. 

Linear probing 

For all analyses other than disease prediction, we evaluated Sensori embeddings using linear probing [47]: the pretrained model was held fixed, and only a linear model was fitted to its embeddings for each downstream task. This protocol is widely used in self-supervised representation learning to assess how readily task-relevant information can be recovered from the embeddings without adapting the pretrained model itself. To ensure comparability, we applied the same linear evaluation framework across all predictor sets, including Sensori embeddings, embeddings from other deep learning models, handcrafted features, and demographic and clinical covariates. For binary outcomes, we used class-balanced 

𝐿 2-regularised logistic regression with class weights inversely proportional to class frequency. For continuous outcomes, we used 𝐿 2-regularised linear regression (ridge regression). For incident disease risk prediction, we used 𝐿 2-regularised Cox proportional hazards models. Hyperparameters were selected by linear sweep using 20% of the training set as validation data. 

Minute-level evaluation For human activity recognition, Sensori minute-level embeddings were compared with a 22-dimensional handcrafted feature set, MOMENT [27], Chronos-2 [28], Bio-PM [29] and Harnet [30]. Linear probes were implemented as class-balanced 

𝐿 2-regularised logistic regression models, with the regularisation hyperparameter 𝐶 tuned separately for each predictor set. In each human activity recognition dataset, linear probe performance was estimated by participant-wise five-fold cross-validation, so that all data from 12 a given participant fell within a single fold and no participant contributed to both fitting and evaluation. Details of data cleaning and implementation are provided in Supplementary Note 3.1. 

Day-level evaluation For each participant, we 𝐿 2-normalised and averaged the Sensori 24-hour embeddings across all valid wear days, yielding one participant-level embedding. Where predictor values were missing, continuous predictors were imputed using the median and binary predictors using the modal category. Continuous predictors were subsequently standardised using the training-partition mean and standard deviation. All imputation and standardisation parameters were estimated exclusively from the training partition and applied unchanged to the test data. Categorical targets were mapped to prespecified binary targets, with the mappings provided in Supplementary Tables 4–7. Participants missing the relevant target were excluded separately from each analysis, and the resulting sample sizes are reported. For device-measured behavioural traits, key demographics (age, sex and BMI) and harmonised health measures (smoking status, alcohol drinking status and self-rated health), linear probes were fitted in the UKB training set and applied without refitting to the held-out UKB test set and to CKB, ELSA and NHANES when the corresponding outcome was available. Unless otherwise stated, 95% CIs were estimated using 1,000 bootstrap resamples of participants. For the ten UKB-specific health axes, linear probes were fitted in the UKB training set and evaluated in the held-out UKB test set, with 95% CIs reported. ELSA and NHANES physical function items were evaluated separately using five-fold cross-validation, with the mean and standard deviation across the five outer folds reported. 

Disease prediction 

Prevalent disease classification and incident disease risk prediction were evaluated in the held-out UKB test set. Disease outcomes were defined using the pomegranate and CALIBER phenotyping frameworks [31, 32], which integrate primary care records (for a subset of partic-ipants), hospital inpatient data and self-reported questionnaire items. We focused on disease categories clinically relevant to wrist-derived accelerometry: endocrine, neurological, respira-tory, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular and psychiatric diseases, covering a total of 123 diseases. Diagnoses recorded before accelerometer wear were classified as prevalent and those recorded afterwards as incident. For each incident disease outcome, participants with the corresponding prevalent disease were excluded from the risk set. We also excluded events occurring within six months after accelerometer wear to minimise reverse-causation bias. Only diseases with at least 60 cases were analysed, yielding 102 diseases for prevalent disease classification and 87 for incident disease risk prediction. Detailed disease definitions and case counts for the entire UKB are provided in Supplementary Table 13. For the disease tasks, we applied supervised disease fine-tuning to enrich disease-related signals by aggregating diseases into body organs specified by CALIBER. Fine-tuning strategy and hyperparameters were selected using participant-disjoint training and validation subsets drawn from the UKB training partition. The convolutional feature encoder was frozen, whereas the linear projection, transformer blocks and organ-level readout were updated. We then regenerated the day-level embeddings and averaged them across all valid days for each participant to obtain fixed participant-level representations for downstream linear probes (Supplementary Note 3.5). 13 Prevalent disease classification was evaluated using logistic regression on the fixed participant-level embeddings. Incident disease risk prediction was assessed using Cox proportional hazards models [48] for 6-year incidence after the accelerometer wear between 2013 and 2015, with outcomes censored at death or study end (follow-up censoring dates: March 2023 for England, August 2022 for Scotland, May 2022 for Wales). We compared four models: a clinical covariate model including age, sex, BMI, ethnic back-ground, smoking status and alcohol consumption; the clinical covariate model with the mean and standard deviation of acceleration; the clinical model with 18 conventional device-measured behavioural traits; and the clinical model with fine-tuned Sensori embeddings. Prevalent disease classification was evaluated using AUROC. Incident disease risk prediction was evaluated using Uno’s C-index [49], which is robust under high levels of censoring. The 95% CIs were estimated by 1,000 bootstrap resamples of participants, and between-model differences were calculated within the same paired resamples. Following Carrasco-Zanini et al. [39], between-model dif-ferences were considered significant when the 95% CI of the paired differences across bootstrap resamples did not include zero. Positive and negative differences meeting this criterion were classified as significant improvements and reductions, respectively. 

# Data availability 

The human activity recognition datasets and NHANES data are publicly available from their original sources and the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, respectively. ELSA data are available through the UK Data Service. UK Biobank and China Kadoorie Biobank data are available to approved researchers through their respective data-access platforms. 

# Code availability 

All code is available at https://github.com/OxWearables/Sensori . The pretrained Sen-sori model weights are available at https://huggingface.co/light156/Sensori . A ded-icated project website at https://oxwearables.github.io/Sensori/ provides visual ex-planations and tutorials on using the codebase and pretrained model weights. 

# Author contributions 

H.Y. and Y.W. conceived the study, designed the research and drafted the manuscript. Z.Z., J.C., J.N., Y.S. and G.N. contributed to the machine learning analyses. Y.W. and H.Y. performed model pretraining and evaluation. D.M., K.B., L.B., D.S., C.Y., J.L., M.B., H.L., A.S., D.W.E., L.L., Z.C., N.W., S.D., G.S.C., H.D. and A.D. contributed to clinical interpretation and validation. A.D. and H.Y. jointly supervised the research. All authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript. 

# Competing interests 

A.D. is supported by grants from the Wellcome Trust [223100/Z/21/Z], Novo Nordisk, Swiss Re, Health Data Research UK, Google and the British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence [RE/18/3/34214]; has accepted consulting fees from the University of Wisconsin 14 (US National Institutes of Health (NIH) R01 grant) and Harvard University (NIH R01 grant); received support for presentations or attendance at several conferences; and has received a donation from Swiss Re for accelerometer data collection in the China Kadoorie Biobank. All other authors declare no competing interests. 

# Acknowledgements 

We thank all participants in UKB, CKB, ELSA and NHANES for their generous contribution to the original data collection efforts. This work uses data provided by patients and collected by the NHS as part of their care and support. This research has been conducted using the UK Biobank Resource under Application Number 59070. We thank the Biomedical Research Computing (BMRC) team at the University of Oxford for assistance with configuring the computing resources used in this study. For the purpose of open access, the author(s) has applied a Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) licence to any Author Accepted Manuscript version arising. A.D.’s research team is supported by a range of grants from the Wellcome Trust [223100/Z/21/Z, 227093/Z/23/Z], GSK, Boehringer Ingelheim, Google, National Institutes of Health’s Oxford Cambridge Scholars Program, EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Health Data Science (EP/S02428X/1), British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence (grant number RE/18/3/34214), Cancer Research UK, and funding administered by the Danish National Research Foundation in support of the Pioneer Centre for SMARTbiomed. H.Y. and K.B. acknowledge fellowship support from the Nuffield Department of Population Health. H.Y. and L.B. also acknowledge support from the Wellcome Trust [223100/Z/21/Z]. Y.W. acknowledges funding from the Pioneer Centre for SMARTbiomed. G.S.C. is a National Institute for Health and Care Research (NIHR) Senior Investigator. The views expressed in this article are those of the author(s) and not necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care. The China Kadoorie Biobank receives funding from the National Natural Science Founda-tion of China (82192901, 82192904, 82192900, 82388102) and the Noncommunicable Chronic Diseases-National Science and Technology Major Project (2023ZD0510101, 2023ZD0510100). 

# References 

[1] Charles Darwin. The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex , volume 2. John Murray, London, 1871. [2] Simon Kemp. Digital 2026: Internet users pass the 6 billion mark, October 2025. URL https://datareportal.com/reports/ digital-2026-six-billion-internet-users . Accessed 22 July 2026. [3] Aiden Doherty, Dan Jackson, Nils Hammerla, Thomas Plötz, Patrick Olivier, Malcolm H Granat, Tom White, Vincent T van Hees, Michael I Trenell, Christopher G Owen, et al. Large scale population assessment of physical activity using wrist worn accelerometers: the UK Biobank study. PLOS ONE , 12(2):e0169649, 2017. [4] Yuanyuan Chen, Shing Chan, Derrick Bennett, Xiaofang Chen, Xianping Wu, Yalei Ke, Jun Lv, Dianjianyi Sun, Lang Pan, Pei Pei, et al. Device-measured movement behaviours 15 in over 20,000 China Kadoorie Biobank participants. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity , 20(1):138, 2023. [5] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National Health and Nutrition Ex-amination Survey (NHANES) 2011–2012 Physical Activity Monitor (PAX80_G) Data, . URL https://wwwn.cdc.gov/Nchs/Data/Nhanes/Public/2011/DataFiles/ PAX80_G.htm .[6] Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). National Health and Nutrition Ex-amination Survey (NHANES) 2013–2014 Physical Activity Monitor (PAX80_H) Data, . URL https://wwwn.cdc.gov/Nchs/Data/Nhanes/Public/2013/DataFiles/ PAX80_H.htm .[7] Hiral Master, Jeffrey Annis, Shi Huang, Joshua A Beckman, Francis Ratsimbazafy, Kayla Marginean, Robert Carroll, Karthik Natarajan, Frank E Harrell, Dan M Roden, et al. Association of step counts over time with the risk of chronic disease in the All of Us Research Program. Nature Medicine , 28(11):2301–2308, 2022. [8] Meagan M Wasfy and I-Min Lee. Examining the dose–response relationship between physical activity and health outcomes. NEJM Evidence , 1(12):EVIDra2200190, 2022. [9] Emmanuel Stamatakis, Matthew N Ahmadi, Jason MR Gill, Cecilie Thøgersen-Ntoumani, Martin J Gibala, Aiden Doherty, and Mark Hamer. Association of wearable device-measured vigorous intermittent lifestyle physical activity with mortality. Nature Medicine ,28(12):2521–2529, 2022. [10] Ann-Kathrin Schalkamp, Kathryn J Peall, Neil A Harrison, and Cynthia Sandor. Wear-able movement-tracking data identify parkinson’s disease years before clinical diagnosis. 

Nature Medicine , 29(8):2048–2056, 2023. [11] Alaina H Shreves, Scott R Small, Rosemary Walmsley, Shing Chan, Pedro F Saint-Maurice, Steven C Moore, Keren Papier, Kezia Gaitskell, Ruth C Travis, Charles E Matthews, et al. Amount and intensity of daily total physical activity, step count and risk of incident cancer in the UK Biobank. British Journal of Sports Medicine , 59(12): 839–847, 2025. [12] Department of Health and Social Care. Fit for the future: 10 year health plan for england, July 2025. URL https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ 10-year-health-plan-for-england-fit-for-the-future . Command Paper CP 1350; ISBN 978-1-5286-5807-2. Updated 30 July 2025. [13] Lei Lu and Josip Car. Wearables as personal health custodians. Nature Medicine , pages 1–4, 2026. [14] Guy Lutsker, Gal Sapir, Smadar Shilo, Jordi Merino, Anastasia Godneva, Jerry R Green-field, Dorit Samocha-Bonet, Raja Dhir, Francisco Gude, Shie Mannor, et al. A foundation model for continuous glucose monitoring data. Nature , pages 1–9, 2026. [15] Salar Abbaspourazad, Oussama Elachqar, Andrew C Miller, Saba Emrani, Udhyakumar Nallasamy, and Ian Shapiro. Large-scale training of foundation models for wearable biosignals. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations , pages 3158–3181, 2024. 16 [16] Arvind Pillai, Dimitris Spathis, Fahim Kawsar, and Mohammad Malekzadeh. PaPaGei: open foundation models for optical physiological signals. In International Conference on Learning Representations , pages 48230–48261, 2025. [17] Rahul Thapa, Magnus Ruud Kjaer, Bryan He, Ian Covert, Hyatt Moore IV, Umaer Hanif, Gauri Ganjoo, M Brandon Westover, Poul Jennum, Andreas Brink-Kjaer, et al. A mul-timodal sleep foundation model for disease prediction. Nature Medicine , pages 1–11, 2026. [18] Adam Gabet, Sarah Kohn, Guy Lutsker, Shira Gelman, Anastasia Godneva, Gil Sasson, Arad Zulti, David Krongauz, Rotem Shaulitch, Assaf Rotem, et al. A gait foundation model predicts multi-system health phenotypes from 3D skeletal motion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.25283 , 2026. [19] Laura Brocklebank, Andrew Steptoe, Mikaela Bloomberg, and Aiden Doherty. Social, eco-nomic, and environmental disparities in device-measured 24-hour movement behaviours in a nationally representative cohort of older English adults. The Journals of Gerontology: Series A , page glag197, 2026. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glag197. [20] Aiden Doherty, Shing Chan, Hang Yuan, and Rosemary Walmsley. accelerometer: A python toolkit for extracting physical activity and behavior metrics from wearable sensor data, 2020. [21] Scott R Small, Shing Chan, Rosemary Walmsley, Lennart von Fritsch, Aidan Acquah, Gert Mertes, Benjamin G Feakins, Andrew Creagh, Adam Strange, Charles E Matthews, et al. Self-supervised machine learning to characterize step counts from wrist-worn accelerometers in the UK Biobank. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise , 56(10): 1945, 2024. [22] Hang Yuan, Tatiana Plekhanova, Rosemary Walmsley, Amy C Reynolds, Kathleen J Maddison, Maja Bucan, Philip Gehrman, Alex Rowlands, David W Ray, Derrick Bennett, et al. Self-supervised learning of accelerometer data provides new insights for sleep and its association with mortality. npj Digital Medicine , 7(1):86, 2024. [23] Attila Reiss and Didier Stricker. Introducing a new benchmarked dataset for activity monitoring. In 2012 16th International Symposium on Wearable Computers , pages 108– 109. IEEE, 2012. [24] Timo Sztyler and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. On-body localization of wearable devices: an investigation of position-aware activity recognition. In 2016 IEEE International Confer-ence on Pervasive Computing and Communications (PerCom) , pages 1–9. IEEE, 2016. [25] Gary M. Weiss. WISDM smartphone and smartwatch activity and biometrics dataset, 2019. [26] Shing Chan, Yuan Hang, Catherine Tong, Aidan Acquah, Abram Schonfeldt, Jonathan Gershuny, and Aiden Doherty. CAPTURE-24: a large dataset of wrist-worn activity tracker data collected in the wild for human activity recognition. Scientific Data , 11:1135, 2024. 17 [27] Mononito Goswami, Konrad Szafer, Arjun Choudhry, Yifu Cai, Shuo Li, and Artur Dubrawski. MOMENT: a family of open time-series foundation models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 16115–16152. PMLR, 2024. [28] Abdul Fatir Ansari, Oleksandr Shchur, Jaris Küken, Andreas Auer, Boran Han, Pedro Mercado, Syama Sundar Rangapuram, Huibin Shen, Lorenzo Stella, Xiyuan Zhang, et al. Chronos-2: from univariate to universal forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15821 ,2025. [29] Prithviraj Tarale, Kiet Chu, Abhishek Varghese, Kai-Chun Liu, Maxwell A Xu, Mohit Iyyer, and Sunghoon I Lee. Bio-inspired self-supervised learning for wrist-worn ac-celerometer data. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2026. [30] Hang Yuan, Shing Chan, Andrew P Creagh, Catherine Tong, Aidan Acquah, David A Clifton, and Aiden Doherty. Self-supervised learning for human activity recognition using 700,000 person-days of wearable data. npj Digital Medicine , 7(1):91, 2024. [31] Spiros Denaxas, Arturo Gonzalez-Izquierdo, Kenan Direk, Natalie K Fitzpatrick, Ghazaleh Fatemifar, Amitava Banerjee, Richard JB Dobson, Laurence J Howe, Valerie Kuan, R Tom Lumbers, et al. Uk phenomics platform for developing and validating electronic health record phenotypes: Caliber. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association ,26(12):1545–1559, 2019. [32] Ana Torralbo, Jonathan M Davitte, Damien C Croteau-Chonka, Cai Ytsma, Chris Tom-linson, Natalie K Fitzpatrick, Sheng-Chia Chung, Ghazaleh Fatemifar, Adrian S Cortes, Tom G Richardson, et al. A computational framework for defining and validating repro-ducible phenotyping algorithms of 313 diseases in the UK Biobank. Scientific Reports ,15(1):24607, 2025. [33] Girish Narayanswamy, Maxwell A Xu, A Ali Heydari, Samy Abdel-Ghaffar, Marius Guerard, Kara Vaillancourt, Zhihan Zhang, Jake Garrison, Levi Albuquerque, Dimitris Spathis, et al. Towards a general intelligence and interface for wearable health data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.22759 , 2026. [34] OpenAI. Launching health in ChatGPT, July 2026. URL https://openai.com/index/ health-in-chatgpt/ . Accessed 28 July 2026. [35] Deyao Zhu, Xiaoqian Shen, Xiang Li, Mohamed Elhoseiny, et al. MiniGPT-4: enhancing vision-language understanding with advanced large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, pages 18378–18394, 2024. [36] Margaret M Redfield, Kevin J Anstrom, James A Levine, Gabe A Koepp, Barry A Borlaug, Horng H Chen, Martin M LeWinter, Susan M Joseph, Sanjiv J Shah, Marc J Semigran, et al. Isosorbide mononitrate in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. New England Journal of Medicine , 373(24):2314–2324, 2015. [37] Laurent Servais, Karl Yen, Maitea Guridi, Jacek Lukawy, David Vissière, and Paul Strijbos. Stride velocity 95th centile: insights into gaining regulatory qualification of the first wearable-derived digital endpoint for use in duchenne muscular dystrophy trials. Journal of Neuromuscular Diseases , 9(2):335–346, 2022. 18 [38] Ana Díez-Fernández, Mairena Sánchez-López, Ricardo Mora-Rodríguez, Blanca Notario-Pacheco, Coral Torrijos-Niño, and Vicente Martínez-Vizcaíno. Obesity as a mediator of the influence of cardiorespiratory fitness on cardiometabolic risk: a mediation analysis. 

Diabetes Care , 37(3):855–862, 2014. [39] Julia Carrasco-Zanini, Maik Pietzner, Jonathan Davitte, Praveen Surendran, Damien C Croteau-Chonka, Chloe Robins, Ana Torralbo, Christopher Tomlinson, Florian Grün-schläger, Natalie Fitzpatrick, et al. Proteomic signatures improve risk prediction for common and rare diseases. Nature Medicine , 30(9):2489–2498, 2024. [40] Sarah Floud, Rachel F Simpson, Angela Balkwill, Anna Brown, Adrian Goodill, John Gallacher, Cathie Sudlow, Phillip Harris, Albert Hofman, Sarah Parish, et al. Body mass index, diet, physical inactivity, and the incidence of dementia in 1 million uk women. 

Neurology , 94(2):e123–e132, 2020. [41] S. Chan and A. Doherty. actipy: Python toolkit to process wearable sensor data, 2021. [42] Takahiro Yamane, Moeka Kimura, and Mizuki Morita. Effects of sampling frequency on human activity recognition with machine learning aiming at clinical applications. Sensors ,25(12):3780, 2025. [43] Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: a framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 12449–12460, 2020. [44] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, 2019. [45] Aaron van den Oord, Yazhe Li, and Oriol Vinyals. Representation learning with contrastive predictive coding. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.03748 , 2018. [46] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. [47] Guillaume Alain and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding intermediate layers using linear classifier probes. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.01644 , 2016. [48] David R Cox. Regression models and life-tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) , 34(2):187–202, 1972. [49] Hajime Uno, Tianxi Cai, Michael J Pencina, Ralph B D’Agostino, and Lee-Jen Wei. On the C-statistics for evaluating overall adequacy of risk prediction procedures with censored survival data. Statistics in Medicine , 30(10):1105–1117, 2011. 19 Table 1: Characteristics of the study populations. Data are shown for eligible participants from four population-based cohorts: UKB, CKB, ELSA and NHANES. 

Characteristic UKB 

𝑛 = 94,089 

CKB 

𝑛 = 20,626 

ELSA 

𝑛 = 3,320 

NHANES 

𝑛 = 4,605 

Study design 

Device Axivity AX3 Axivity AX3 Axivity AX3 ActiGraph GT3X+ Wrist placement Dominant wrist Dominant wrist Dominant wrist Non-dominant wrist Country UK China UK USA 

Demographics 

Age (years), median [P25–P75] 63.6 [56.4–68.7] 65.5 [57.8–71.7] 69.0 [61.5–75.9] 59.0 [51.0–67.0] 33.6–49.9 7,675 (8.2%) 375 (1.8%) 28 (0.8%) 963 (20.9%) 50–59 26,757 (28.4%) 6,404 (31.1%) 656 (19.8%) 1,345 (29.2%) 60–69 41,836 (44.5%) 7,303 (35.4%) 1,104 (33.3%) 1,435 (31.2%) 70.0–98.9 17,821 (18.9%) 6,526 (31.7%) 1,532 (46.1%) 862 (18.7%) Female sex, 𝑛 (%) 52,984 (56.3%) 13,446 (65.2%) 1,847 (55.6%) 2,401 (52.1%) BMI (kg/m 2), median [P25–P75] 26.0 [23.6–29.0] 24.3 [22.2–26.7] 27.3 [24.4–31.1] 28.6 [24.9–33.2] Underweight (10.4–18.4) 488 (0.5%) 617 (3.0%) 18 (0.7%) 56 (1.2%) Normal weight (18.5–24.9) 35,407 (38.2%) 11,098 (53.9%) 788 (30.0%) 1,112 (24.2%) Overweight (25.0–29.9) 38,625 (41.6%) 7,541 (36.6%) 1,007 (38.3%) 1,529 (33.2%) Obese (30.0–82.9) 18,247 (19.7%) 1,340 (6.5%) 817 (31.1%) 1,905 (41.4%) 

Device metrics 

Acceleration (mg), median [P25–P75] 27.1 [22.5–32.6] 29.6 [22.5–37.9] 21.7 [17.1–27.3] 22.6 [17.4–28.3] 2.5–19.9 13,427 (14.3%) 3,598 (17.4%) 1,364 (41.1%) 1,716 (37.3%) 20–30 47,208 (50.2%) 6,959 (33.7%) 1,406 (42.4%) 1,965 (42.7%) 30–40 26,136 (27.8%) 5,852 (28.4%) 450 (13.6%) 730 (15.9%) 40.0–256.2 7,317 (7.8%) 4,217 (20.4%) 99 (3.0%) 194 (4.2%) Steps per day, median [P25–P75] 7,938 [6,007–10,126] 10,105 [7,306–13,165] 5,440 [3,446–7,648] 6,639 [4,416–9,236] 0–4,999 13,700 (14.6%) 2,160 (10.5%) 1,471 (44.3%) 1,451 (31.5%) 5,000–7,499 27,780 (29.5%) 3,307 (16.0%) 977 (29.4%) 1,248 (27.1%) 7,500–9,999 27,998 (29.8%) 4,666 (22.6%) 536 (16.1%) 1,016 (22.1%) 10,000–37,288 24,611 (26.2%) 10,493 (50.9%) 336 (10.1%) 890 (19.3%) Sleep duration (h), median [P25–P75] † 6.86 [6.24–7.42] 6.03 [5.23–6.80] 6.77 [6.08–7.41] —0.06–5.99 17,004 (18.1%) 10,036 (48.9%) 665 (23.0%) —6–8 69,057 (73.5%) 9,450 (46.0%) 1,948 (67.4%) —8.00–17.49 7,849 (8.4%) 1,045 (5.1%) 279 (9.6%) —

Values are median [P25–P75] or n (%); P25 and P75 denote the 25th and 75th percentiles, respectively. Percentages use variable-specific non-missing denominators. BMI was taken from the baseline assessment visit for UKB. For CKB, ELSA and NHANES, BMI was taken from the same resurvey as the accelerometer data.  

> †

Sleep duration was not available for NHANES; missing values are shown as —. 

20 Figures Health monitor Sleep Poor Good Physical activity Low High Self-supervision tasks Physical function test Balance Open door Stand Dress self 

✓

✗✓✓

Incident disease prediction Parkinson’s Dementia Insomnia Depression 

↑↑↑↓

14:38:10 0:00 06:00 12:00 18:00 24:00 Wrist Movement 14:38:40 

> xyzMagnitude

24-hour embedding 24-hour pattern 0:00 24:00 Local pattern 

a  

> UKB CKB ELSA NHANES Health Not used Used Physical function Disease
> # Participant
> Test Train

5-minute mask reconstruction Randomly mask input sequence and predict missing segments The same participant has similar representations across days Reconstructed Masked Visible Day-level contrastive learning Same 

> participant
> Different participants Pull closer Push apart

24 h @ 10 Hz 864,000 x 3 0:00 24:00 

bc

5-minute 1-minute Contextual 24-hour Encoder Pooling Transformer Pooling 

Figure 1: Study overview. a, Conceptual framework of Sensori. Sensori captures patterns in raw tri-axial wrist movement across multiple temporal scales over a 24-hour period and integrates them into a day-level health representation for downstream tasks. b, Sensori architec-ture and self-supervised pretraining. Sensori takes 24 hours of raw 10-Hz wrist movement as input and generates a day-level embedding using a multiscale deep neural network. Sensori is pretrained using masked reconstruction at the five-minute level and contrastive learning at the day level. c, Study cohorts and evaluation design. Left, participant partitioning for pretraining and downstream evaluation. Right, cohorts used for each downstream evaluation task. 21 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Cohen's κ PAMAP2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Cohen's κ RealWorld Handcrafted MOMENT Chronos-2 Bio-PM Harnet Sensori 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Cohen's κ WISDM Handcrafted MOMENT Chronos-2 Bio-PM Harnet Sensori 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Cohen's κ CAPTURE-24 

Structured (PAMAP2) Lying down Sitting Standing Ironing Vacuum cleaning Walking Ascending stairs Descending stairs 

Free-living (CAPTURE-24) Sleep Light Sedentary Moderate-vigorous 

> Physical activity

0.37 0.41 0.48 0.44 0.38 0.32 0.47 0.38 0.29 0.34 0.28 0.22 0.33 0.20 0.34 0.32 0.33 0.29 0.34 0.26 0.25 0.17 0.33 0.32 Baseline 

Acceleration mean Acceleration s.d. Light duration Moderate-vigorous duration Sedentary duration Metabolic equivalent 0.90 0.94 0.94 0.82 0.74 0.81 0.82 0.44 0.95 0.93 0.95 0.90 0.90 0.84 0.90 0.59 0.94 0.94 0.93 0.84 0.92 0.91 0.92 0.90 Embedding 

> Step

0.28 0.19 0.39 0.40 0.26 0.11 0.32 0.36 0.35 0.31 0.40 0.39 0.30 0.25 0.41 0.42 0.29 0.21 0.38 0.36 

Daily step count Daily walking duration Maximum daily cadence Mean top-30 cadence 95th-percentile cadence 0.94 0.94 0.95 0.91 0.94 0.94 0.95 0.94 0.75 0.75 0.80 0.70 0.81 0.83 0.85 0.79 0.77 0.78 0.80 0.68 

> UKB (n=19,556) CKB (n=4,120) ELSA (n=3,320) NHANES (n=4,605) Sleep

0.08 0.08 0.09 0.16 0.11 0.07 0.09 0.03 0.03 0.12 0.05 0.04 0.09 0.02 0.02 0.20 0.15 0.12 0.27 0.27 0.30 

> UKB (n=19,556) CKB (n=4,120) ELSA (n=3,320) NHANES (n=4,605)

Sleep onset latency Total sleep time Wake after sleep onset Sleep efficiency Total wake time during sleep Total NREM sleep duration Total REM sleep duration 0.38 0.43 0.40 0.87 0.86 0.86 0.77 0.75 0.74 0.79 0.77 0.77 0.78 0.77 0.75 0.79 0.79 0.79 0.76 0.65 0.77 

0.0 0.5 1.0 Pearson's r 

abcFigure 2: Sensori representations capture diverse behavioural traits across temporal scales and populations. a , Linear-probe performance for one-minute activity recognition across four external benchmark datasets. Sensori is compared with handcrafted features, general-purpose time-series foundation models (MOMENT and Chronos-2) and domain-specific models (Bio-PM and Harnet). Bars and error bars indicate mean Cohen’s 𝜅 and s.d. across five participant-wise cross-validation folds, respectively. b, Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) plots of minute-level Sensori embeddings under structured (PAMAP2) and free-living (CAPTURE-24) conditions. Each point represents a one-minute window coloured by its activity label; CAPTURE-24 is randomly subsampled to 5,000 windows for visualisation. c, Cross-cohort prediction of day-level device-measured behavioural traits and device statistics. Linear probes are fitted on the UKB training set and evaluated without refitting in the UKB test set, CKB test set, ELSA and NHANES. The demographic baseline uses age, sex and BMI, whereas the embedding model uses Sensori 24-hour embeddings. Cell values show Pearson’s 𝑟 between predicted and target values; cell colour represents values on a scale from 0 to 1, and grey cells indicate unavailable traits. 𝑛 , number of participants. 22 UKB CKB ELSA NHANES 0.0 0.5 1.0 True positive rate AUROC=0.996 AUROC=0.630 n=19,556 

40 60 80 Predicted (years) r=0.837 r=0.291 n=19,556 

20 40 60 Predicted (kg m −2 )r=0.733 r=0.273 n=19,236 

0.0 0.5 1.0 AUROC=0.969 AUROC=0.635 n=4,120 

40 60 80 r=0.765 r=0.393 n=4,120 

20 40 60 r=0.511 r=0.092 n=4,117 

0.0 0.5 1.0 AUROC=0.988 AUROC=0.601 n=3,320 

40 60 80 r=0.846 r=0.427 n=3,320 

20 40 60 r=0.710 r=0.283 n=2,630 

0.0 0.5 1.0 False positive rate 0.0 0.5 1.0 AUROC=0.976 AUROC=0.536 n=4,605 

40 60 80 Observed (years) 40 60 80 r=0.677 r=0.385 n=4,605 

20 40 60 Observed (kg m −2 )20 40 60 r=0.596 r=0.221 n=4,602 

Acc mean/s.d. Embedding UKB ELSA NHANES 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 

n=19,552 n=3,319 n=4,601 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 AUROC 

n=19,546 n=3,110 n=4,323 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 

n=19,524 n=3,319 n=4,349 UKB ELSA (5-fold) NHANES (5-fold) 

Long-standing illness (n=19,544) Getting up easily (n=19,544) Nap during day (n=19,550) Sleeplessness (n=19,548) Daytime dozing (n=19,523) Mood swings (n=19,220) Tiredness/lethargy (n=19,162) Brisk walking pace (n=19,501) Shortness of breath (n=4,515) Happiness (n=4,562) Walk 100 yards (n=3,320) Sit 2 hours (n=3,320) Stand from chair (n=3,320) Climb several flights (n=3,320) Climb one flight (n=3,320) Stoop/crouch/kneel (n=3,320) Reach above shoulder (n=3,320) Push/pull objects (n=3,320) Lift/carry >10 lb (n=3,320) Pick up 5p coin (n=3,320) Walk 1/4 mile (n=4,577) Walk 10 steps (n=4,585) Stoop/crouch/kneel (n=4,559) Lift/carry (n=4,549) House chores (n=4,513) Prepare meals (n=4,477) Walk between rooms (n=4,600) Stand from chair (n=4,599) Get in/out of bed (n=4,596) Eat with utensils (n=4,604) Dress self (n=4,602) Stand long periods (n=4,542) Sit long periods (n=4,593) Reach overhead (n=4,594) Grasp small objects (n=4,601) Go out to events (n=4,505) Attend social events (n=4,435) Leisure at home (n=4,597) Push/pull objects (n=4,456) 

0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 AUROC 

Sex Age BMI 

a

Smoking status Alcohol drinking status Self-rated health Self-reported health axes and physical function items 

cb Baseline Baseline + Acc mean/s.d. Baseline + Embedding Baseline Baseline + Acc mean/s.d. Baseline + Embedding Figure 3: Sensori encodes key demographic characteristics and multidimensional health axes. a , Prediction of sex, age and BMI in held-out evaluation sets from UKB, CKB, ELSA and NHANES, shown as receiver operating characteristic curves with AUROC for sex and scatter plots with Pearson’s 𝑟 for age and BMI. Predictions from day-level Sensori representations are shown in colour, with one colour per cohort, and predictions based on the mean and standard deviation of acceleration (Acc mean/s.d.) are shown in grey. b, AUROC for three harmonised traits—smoking status, alcohol drinking status and self-rated health—across UKB, ELSA and NHANES. These traits were selected for their relevance to health and availability in all three cohorts. Points and error bars indicate AUROC and 95% bootstrap CIs, respectively. c, AUROC for self-reported health axes in UKB and physical function items in ELSA and NHANES. For UKB, linear probes were fitted on the UKB training set and evaluated in the held-out UKB test set; points and error bars indicate AUROC and 95% bootstrap CIs, respectively. For ELSA and NHANES, linear probes were evaluated using within-cohort five-fold cross-validation; points and error bars indicate mean AUROC and s.d. across the five outer folds, respectively. Baseline denotes age, sex and BMI; Acc mean/s.d. denotes the mean and standard deviation of acceleration; Embedding denotes Sensori day-level embeddings. 𝑛 , number of participants. 23 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Cosine similarity Intra-person, weekday–weekend Intra-person, all day pairs Inter-person, all day pairs 1 2 3 4 5 6Number of days 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 Pearson's r / AUROC      

> Sex (AUROC) Age (Pearson's r) BMI (Pearson's r) 123456Number of days 0.55 0.65 0.75 0.85 AUROC
> Smoking status Alcohol drinking status Self-rated health Mean of 10 health axes 0.0 0.3 0.6 AUROC gain Sex 0.0 0.3 0.6 Pearson's r gain Age 0.0 0.3 0.6 Pearson's r gain BMI 0.0 0.1 0.2 AUROC gain Smoking status 0.0 0.1 0.2 AUROC gain Alcohol drinking status 0.0 0.1 0.2 AUROC gain Self-rated health
> 0.00 0.05 0.10 AUROC gain 10 health axes Individual item Mean Compare with Acc mean/s.d. Device-measured daily traits Device-measured hourly traits Device-measured daily+hourly traits Embedding

a bcFigure 4: Stability across days, performance with multi-day inputs and comparison with conventional device-measured behavioural traits. a, Participant-level cosine similarity of day-level embeddings within and between individuals. Central dots, bars and whiskers represent the median, interquartile range and most extreme values within 1.5 × the interquartile range, respectively; violin widths indicate density. b, Linear-probe performance of day-level embed-dings using one to six input days at test time. Markers and error bars indicate performance and 95% bootstrap CIs, respectively. The unweighted mean across ten UKB health axes is shown without a CI. c, Gain in linear-probe performance relative to corresponding models using the mean and standard deviation of acceleration (Acc mean/s.d.). In the six task-specific plots, bars show performance gains using device-measured daily traits, hourly traits, their combination and Sensori day-level embeddings. Error bars indicate 95% CIs estimated by paired bootstrap resampling of participants. The rightmost plot shows AUROC gains for each of ten health axes (circles connected by lines) and their unweighted means (diamonds). All analyses were conducted using the held-out UKB test set. 24 Diabetes Type II Diabetes NOS Diabetes Type I Parkinson's disease Diabetic neurological complications Multiple sclerosis Essential tremor Postviral fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia Epilepsy Migraine Autonomic nervous system disorders Peripheral neuropathies COPD excluding bronchitis NOS COPD Sleep apnoea Respiratory failure Asthma Allergic and chronic rhinitis Chronic sinusitis Abdominal aortic aneurysm Myocardial infarction Unstable Angina Heart failure Ischaemic stroke Stable angina Coronary heart disease NOS Atrial fibrillation Nonrheumatic aortic valve disorders Peripheral arterial disease Hypertension Venous thromboembolic disease (Excl PE) Raynaud's syndrome Schizophrenia-related disorders Other psychoactive substance misuse Bipolar affective disorder and mania Alcohol Problems Obsessive-compulsive disorder Personality disorders Anxiety disorders Depression Gout Spondylolisthesis Rheumatoid Arthritis Giant Cell arteritis Osteoarthritis (excl spine) Scoliosis Spondylosis Fracture of hip Carpal tunnel syndrome Psoriatic arthropathy Intervertebral disc disorders Enthesopathies & synovial disorders 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 AUROC 

Endocrine 

(3/10) 

Neurological 

(9/11) 

Respiratory 

(7/15) 

Cardiovascular 

(13/35) 

Psychiatric 

(8/10) 

Musculoskeletal 

(12/21) 

> Diabetes Type II Diabetes NOS Parkinson's disease Essential tremor Peripheral neuropathies COPD COPD excluding bronchitis NOS Respiratory failure Sleep apnoea Heart failure Multiple valve dz Hypertension Sick sinus syndrome Dementia (excluding Alzheimer's) Delirium Dementia Alzheimer's disease Alcohol Problems Depression Anxiety disorders Spondylolisthesis Spinal stenosis Spondylosis Osteoarthritis (excl spine) Intervertebral disc disorders Enthesopathies & synovial disorders

0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 Uno’s C-index 

Endocrine 

(2/8) 

Neurological 

(3/7) 

Respiratory 

(4/15) 

Cardiovascular 

(4/31) 

Psychiatric 

(7/7) 

Musculoskeletal 

(6/19) 

ab

Clinical Clinical + Acc mean/s.d. Clinical + Embedding Figure 5: Performance on prevalent disease classification and incident disease risk predic-tion. a , Prevalent disease classification in UKB, evaluated using AUROC. b, Six-year incident disease risk prediction in UKB, evaluated using Uno’s C-index. For both tasks, three mod-els were compared: clinical covariates alone, clinical covariates plus the mean and standard deviation of acceleration (Acc mean/s.d.), and clinical covariates plus fine-tuned Sensori embed-dings. Clinical covariates comprised age, sex, BMI, ethnic background, alcohol consumption and smoking status. Only conditions for which adding Sensori embeddings significantly im-proved performance over the clinical covariate model are shown; fractions indicate the number of such conditions among all eligible conditions in each disease category. Error bars indicate 95% CIs in the held-out UKB test set. 25 Supplementary Materials: Learning Human Health and Diseases from 24-hour Wrist Movement 

Contents 

1 Sensori model development 3

1.1 Model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31.2 Pretraining objectives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31.2.1 Masked reconstruction of five-minute-level embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31.2.2 Instance contrastive of five-minute-level embeddings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41.2.3 Day contrastive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41.3 Pretraining experiments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

2 Study populations and benchmark datasets 7

2.1 Prospective cohort studies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72.2 Datasets for Human Activity Recognition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 

3 Evaluations 15 

3.1 Human activity recognition benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 3.2 Evaluating day-level behavioural traits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 3.3 Evaluating key demographic characteristics and multidimensional health axes . . . . . . . . . . . 19 3.4 Prediction of multidimensional health axes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 3.5 Disease prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 

List of Tables 

1 Sensori model architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 Model performance across supervision objectives at epoch 99 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53 Ablation study of architecture and masking design choices at epoch 99 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64 UKB variable definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 5 CKB variable definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 6 ELSA variable definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 7 NHANES variable definitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 8 Overview of human activity recognition datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 9 Class composition of human activity recognition datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 10 Definitions of device-measured behavioural traits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 11 Prediction of device-measured behavioural traits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 12 Prediction of age, sex and BMI across cohorts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 13 Disease-level inclusion criteria for the full UKB cohort. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 14 Supervised fine-tuning model performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 15 Paired-bootstrap comparison of clinical covariates plus fine-tuned Sensori embeddings against alternative feature models for disease prediction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29 

List of Figures 

1 Scaling laws for pretraining strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52 Participant inclusion for UKB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 Participant inclusion for CKB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84 Participant inclusion for ELSA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 915 Participant inclusion for NHANES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 6 Additional results of human activity recognition benchmarks. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16 7 Individual results for the ten UKB health axes. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 8 Overlap in positive performance differences . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 9 Comparison of prevalent disease classification performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 10 Comparison of incident disease risk prediction performance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28 21 Sensori model development 

1.1 Model architecture 

The Sensori model consists of a convolutional feature encoder followed by a transformer encoder. The convolutional feature encoder transforms a 24-hour sequence of raw movement signals X into minute-level embeddings, which are aggregated by mean pooling into 288 five-minute-level embeddings Z : 𝑧 1, . . . , 𝑧 288 . These embeddings are fed into the transformer encoder, which produces contextualised representations H : ℎ1, . . . , ℎ 288 capturing dependencies across the full 24-hour period. A day-level representation ℎ𝑑𝑎𝑦 is obtained by mean pooling the transformer output H . Two configurations of the Sensori model were used: a 20M-parameter model and a 40M-parameter model. Supplementary Table 1 summarises their architecture in full. Supplementary Table 1: Sensori model architecture. 

Component 20M model 40M model 

Feature encoder (1-D convolutional stack) 

Input channels 3 3Convolutional layers 7 7Channels per layer 256 512 Kernel sizes (layers 1-7) 10, 3, 3, 3, 2, 2, 2 10, 3, 3, 3, 2, 2, 2 Strides (layers 1-7) 5, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2 5, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2, 2 Normalisation GroupNorm (layer 1 only) GroupNorm (layer 1only) Parameters 991,232 3,948,544 

Transformer encoder 

Input projection (conv to embedding) Linear(256, 512) Linear(512, 768) Embedding dimension 512 768 Encoder layers 8 8Attention heads 8 12 Head dimension 64 64 Feed-forward dimension 1024 1024 Positional embedding Absolute (fixed sinusoidal) Relative (conv, kernel 32, groups 16) Parameters 16,823,296 32,702,752 

Self-supervised projection heads 

Masked / rank projection dim. (z) 512 768 Contrastive embedding dim. 512 512 Parameters (mask token + all heads) 1,864,754 3,976,498 

Total 

Total parameters 19,811,890 41,023,314 Total parameters (millions) 19.8M 41.0M 

1.2 Pretraining objectives 

We explored three pretraining objectives: masked reconstruction, instance contrastive, and day contrastive. Wrist movement is a rich signal with health information encoded at multiple temporal scales; we therefore hypothe-sised that pretraining with multiple objectives spanning different temporal scales would capture complementary information in wrist movement. 

1.2.1 Masked reconstruction of five-minute-level embeddings 

Similar to masked language modelling [1] and wav2vec2 in audio [2], we masked a random subset of the five-minute-level embeddings and trained the model to reconstruct the masked embeddings from the unmasked ones. We reasoned that reconstructing latent embeddings would induce a better inductive bias than reconstructing the raw waveform directly. At every masked position 𝑡 , the transformer output ℎ𝑡 was trained to identify the true embedding 𝑧 𝑡 among 𝐾 

distractor embeddings, sampled uniformly from the other masked positions of the same 24-hour recording. The 3loss is defined as: 

L𝑚𝑎𝑠𝑘 = −∑︁  

> 𝑡 ∈ M

log exp (sim (ℎ𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑡 )/ 𝜏 )

Í𝐾 +1 

> 𝑘 =1

exp (sim (ℎ𝑡 , 𝑧 𝑘 )/ 𝜏 ) (1) where M is the set of masked positions, the sum in the denominator runs over the true embedding 𝑧 𝑡 and its 𝐾 

distractors, 𝜏 is a temperature hyperparameter, and sim (𝑢, 𝑣 ) = 𝑢 · 𝑣 /(∥ 𝑢 ∥∥ 𝑣 ∥) is the cosine similarity. 

Weighted masking As observed in our prior work [3], when using free-living movement data for pretraining, weighted sampling of windows by activity intensity was essential to reduce ambiguity in the self-supervision signal. Hence, we also tested a variant of masked reconstruction that weighted the sampling of masked positions by the standard deviation of the acceleration signal within each window. 

1.2.2 Instance contrastive of five-minute-level embeddings 

Instance contrastive was inspired by the observation that, in free-living individuals, movement patterns are con-founded by numerous factors such as environment and life events. The goal of instance contrastive learning is therefore to isolate individual-specific invariants that persist across these confounders, by directly contrasting matched behavioural states across days, comparing walking with walking, and sleeping with sleeping, rather than walking with sleeping. Concretely, we first bin all five-minute embeddings into ten deciles of activity intensity. At each training step, we sample a target decile at random, and every participant in the mini-batch contributes one embedding from that decile on each of two different days, giving a positive pair (𝑧 𝑝 , 𝑧 ′ 

> 𝑝

) for participant 𝑝 that reflects the same activity-intensity level expressed on two different days. Embeddings from the other participants in the mini-batch serve as negatives. The loss is defined as: 

L𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑡 = −

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑝 =1

log exp (sim (𝑧 𝑝 , 𝑧 ′ 

> 𝑝

)/ 𝜏 )

Í𝑁 𝑗 =1 exp (sim (𝑧 𝑝 , 𝑧 ′ 

> 𝑗

)/ 𝜏 ) (2) where 𝑁 is the number of participants in the mini-batch, and 𝜏 and sim (· , ·) are as defined in Eq. (1). 

1.2.3 Day contrastive 

Unlike the two objectives above, day contrastive aims to capture day-level invariants for each participant. Different days of the same participant are treated as a positive pair, while days from other participants serve as negatives. The loss is defined as: 

L𝑑𝑎𝑦 = −

> 𝑁

∑︁ 

> 𝑝 =1

log exp (sim (ℎ𝑝 𝑑𝑎𝑦 , ℎ 𝑝 ′ 

> 𝑑𝑎𝑦

)/ 𝜏 )

Í𝑁 𝑗 =1 exp (sim (ℎ𝑝 𝑑𝑎𝑦 , ℎ 𝑗 ′ 

> 𝑑𝑎𝑦

)/ 𝜏 ) (3) where ℎ𝑝 𝑑𝑎𝑦 and ℎ𝑝 ′ 

> 𝑑𝑎𝑦

are the day-level representations of two different days for participant 𝑝 , and 𝑁 , 𝜏 , and sim (· , ·) 

are as defined above. In early experiments we also tried a more causally motivated contrastive approach that grouped participants with similar demographic characteristics (e.g., age, sex, BMI)—common confounders of movement—within the same contrastive batch, but this did not yield a noticeable improvement in performance. 41.3 Pretraining experiments 0.44 0.46 0.48 0.50                    

> Score
> Age ( R2)
> 0.84 0.86 0.88 0.90
> Score
> Sex (F1_macro)
> 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
> Epoch
> 0.22 0.24 0.26 0.28 0.30
> Score
> BMI ( R2)
> 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
> Epoch
> 0.52 0.54 0.56 0.58
> Score
> Device average ( R2)
> Task-wise Performance vs Epoch
> Model masked masked + instance contrastive masked + day contrastive masked + day contrastive (delayed start)

Supplementary Figure 1: Scaling laws for different pretraining strategies. 

Supplementary Table 2: Model performance across supervision objectives at epoch 99. Values are mean ± s.d. across age, sex, BMI, and device outcomes; device average is the mean 𝑅 2 across device tasks. 

Model Age ( 𝑅 2) Sex (F1 macro) BMI ( 𝑅 2) Device average ( 𝑅 2)Masked 0.493 ± 0.011 0.891 ± 0.007 0.295 ± 0.026 0.593 ± 0.016 Masked + instance contrastive 0.488 ± 0.015 0.892 ± 0.006 0.280 ± 0.024 0.591 ± 0.015 Masked + day contrastive 0.512 ± 0.021 0.893 ± 0.002 0.305 ± 0.024 0.577 ± 0.015 Masked + day contrastive (delayed start) 0.514 ± 0.022 0.903 ± 0.008 0.302 ± 0.023 0.596 ± 0.016 

We define the baseline model for the following ablation as weighted masking off, absolute positional embedding, 20M parameters, and a 5-minute masking temporal horizon with a masking ratio of 0.5. For each ablation, we pretrained on a subset of 10,000 participants in the UK Biobank training set for 100 epochs and performed linear probing on age, sex and BMI, and the core set of algorithmically derived behavioural traits. For multi-objective pretraining, the task weight for masked reconstruction was fixed at 0.9, with the complementary objective weighted at 0.1. Linear probing performance is reported on the same 10,000 participants with five-fold cross-validation. Fig. 1 and Table 2 summarise performance across supervision objectives. We observed a monotonic increase in performance with training epochs, with the best-performing model, masked + day contrastive (delayed start), achieving the top result on three of four tasks. Although day contrastive could in principle distil more global information into the representations, it was not as effective as expected, possibly because of the limited number of days available for each participant. 5Supplementary Table 3: Ablation study of architecture and masking design choices at epoch 99. Values are mean ± s.d.; device average is the mean 𝑅 2 across device tasks. 

Model Age (R2) Sex (F1 macro) BMI (R2) Device Avg (R2) Masked + day contrastive (delayed start) 0.514 ± 0.022 0.903 ± 0.008 0.302 ± 0.023 0.596 ± 0.016 + Weighted masking 0.484 ± 0.023 0.895 ± 0.002 0.299 ± 0.029 0.584 ± 0.013 + Model size 40M parameters 0.554 ± 0.010 0.930 ± 0.008 0.375 ± 0.024 0.615 ± 0.014 + Relative positional embedding 0.515 ± 0.015 0.912 ± 0.007 0.330 ± 0.022 0.588 ± 0.016 + Masking temporal horizon: 10 mins 0.488 ± 0.012 0.884 ± 0.005 0.284 ± 0.029 0.568 ± 0.019 + Masking temporal horizon: 30 mins 0.465 ± 0.016 0.864 ± 0.008 0.265 ± 0.024 0.562 ± 0.016 

Finally, Table 3 informed the other key design choices for Sensori, namely the use of the 40M model, relative positional embedding, a masking temporal horizon of 5 minutes, and pretraining without weighted masking for the masked reconstruction task. 62 Study populations and benchmark datasets 

2.1 Prospective cohort studies UK Biobank (UKB) 

Initial accelerometer cohort n = 103,685 Included after accelerometer QA n = 94,089 

Excluded by accelerometer QA n = 9,596 

Geographical split 

Training set Development regions n = 74,533 Test set Held-out regions n = 19,556 

Excluded: missing task-speci fi c covariates (n varies by task) 

Task-speci fi c evaluation sample (n varies by task) 

Supplementary Figure 2: Participant inclusion for UKB. 

7China Kadoorie Biobank (CKB) 

Initial accelerometer cohort n = 22,262 Included after accelerometer QA n = 20,626 

Excluded by accelerometer QA n = 1,636 

Random split 

Training set n = 16,504 Test set n = 4,122 

Excluded: missing task-speci fi c covariates (n varies by task) 

Task-speci fi c evaluation sample (n varies by task) Supplementary Figure 3: Participant inclusion for CKB. 

8English Longitudinal Study of Ageing (ELSA) 

Initial accelerometer cohort n = 3,856 External test set after QA n = 3,320 

Excluded by accelerometer QA n = 536 

> Excluded: missing task-speci fi c covariates (n varies by task)

Task-speci fi c evaluation sample (n varies by task) Supplementary Figure 4: Participant inclusion for ELSA. 

9National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 

Initial accelerometer cohort n = 14,692 Included after accelerometer QA n = 12,236 

Excluded by accelerometer QA n = 2,456 

External test set within UKB age range n = 4,506 

Excluded: outside UKB age range n = 7,730 

> Excluded: missing task-speci fi c covariates (n varies by task)

Task-speci fi c evaluation sample (n varies by task) Supplementary Figure 5: Participant inclusion for NHANES. 

10 Supplementary Table 4: UKB variable definitions. Demographic covariates, harmonised health axes and UKB-specific health axes used in the analyses. Unmapped non-response categories were treated as missing. 

Name Field ID Analysis coding 

Demographic covariates 

Sex 31 Female = 0; Male = 1 Age 34, 52, 90011 Continuous (years); derived from year and month of birth and accelerometer wear end date BMI 23104 Continuous (kg m −2)Ethnic background 21000 White = 1; all other ethnic backgrounds = 0 

Harmonised health axes 

Smoking status 1239 No = 0; Yes, on most or all days, or only occasionally = 1 Regular alcohol drinking 1558 Never or only on special occasions = 0; One to three times a month or more often = 1 Self-rated health 2178 Fair or poor = 0; Good or excellent = 1 

UKB-specific health axes 

Long-standing illness 2188 No or do not know = 0; Yes = 1 Getting up easily 1170 Not very easy or not at all easy = 0; Fairly easy or very easy = 1 Nap during day 1190 Never/rarely = 0; Sometimes or usually = 1 Sleeplessness 1200 Never/rarely = 0; Sometimes or usually = 1 Daytime dozing 1220 Never/rarely = 0; Sometimes, often or all of the time = 1 Mood swings 1920 No = 0; Yes = 1 Tiredness/lethargy 2080 Not at all = 0; Several days, more than half the days, or nearly every day = 1 Brisk walking pace 924 Slow pace or steady average pace = 0; Brisk pace = 1 Shortness of breath 4717 No = 0; Yes = 1 Happiness 4526 Extremely/very/moderately unhappy = 0; Extremely/very/moderately happy = 1 

Supplementary Table 5: CKB variable definitions. Demographic covariates were harmonised to the labels and coding used across cohorts. 

Name CKB variable Analysis coding 

Sex is_female Female = 0; Male = 1 Age age_at_study_date_x100 Continuous (years); divided by 100 BMI bmi_calc Continuous (kg m −2)

11 Supplementary Table 6: ELSA variable definitions. Unless otherwise stated, variables were obtained from ELSA wave 10. Unmapped non-response categories were treated as missing. 

Name ELSA variable Analysis coding 

Demographic covariates 

Sex indsex 1 (Male) = 1; 2 (Female) = 0 Age indobyr Continuous (years); calculated from year of birth and accelerometer start date, with waves 1 and 3 used when wave-10 birth-year values were missing BMI height , weight ,

estwt ;

bmival , r8mbmi 

Continuous (kg m −2); calculated from measured height and weight, with estimated weight ( estwt ) used when measured weight was unavailable; bmival from wave 11 and r8mbmi from wave 8 were used when wave-10 BMI values were missing 

Harmonised health axes 

Smoking status hesmk , heska hesmk (ever smoked) = 2 (No) or heska (currently smokes) = 2 (No) mapped to 0; heska = 1 (Yes) mapped to 1 Regular alcohol drinking scako 6–8 (Once every couple of months or less often) mapped to 0; 1–5 (Once or twice a month or more often) mapped to 1 Self-rated health hehelf 1 (Excellent), 2 (Very good) or 3 (Good) mapped to 1; 4 (Fair) or 5 (Poor) mapped to 0 

ELSA-specific physical function items 

Participants were asked whether, because of a health problem, they had difficulty doing any of the listed activities. Walk 100 yards hemobwa 

0 (Not mentioned) = 0; 1 (Mentioned) = 1 Sit 2 hours hemobsi 

Stand from chair hemobch 

Climb several flights hemobcs 

Climb one flight hemobcl 

Stoop/crouch/kneel hemobst 

Reach above shoulder hemobre 

Push/pull objects hemobpu 

Lift/carry > 10 lb hemobli 

Pick up 5p coin hemobpi 

12 Supplementary Table 7: NHANES variable definitions. Variables were obtained from the 2011–2012 and 2013– 2014 survey cycles and had identical names and coding in both cycles. Unmapped non-response categories were treated as missing. 

Name NHANES variable Analysis coding 

Demographic covariates 

Sex RIAGENDR 1 (Male) = 1; 2 (Female) = 0 Age RIDAGEYR Continuous (years) BMI BMXBMI ;

WHD010 , WHD020 

Continuous (kg m −2); measured BMI ( BMXBMI ) was used where available, with BMI calculated from self-reported height ( WHD010 )and weight ( WHD020 ) otherwise 

Harmonised health axes 

Smoking status SMQ020 , SMQ040 SMQ020 (smoked at least 100 cigarettes) = 2 (No) or SMQ040 

(currently smokes) = 3 (Not at all) mapped to 0; SMQ040 = 1 (Every day) or 2 (Some days) mapped to 1 Regular alcohol drinking ALQ101 , ALQ120Q ,

ALQ120U 

Drinking frequency was converted to days per year using ALQ120Q 

and ALQ120U ; fewer than 12 days per year, or ALQ101 = 2 (No) when frequency was unavailable, mapped to 0; at least 12 days per year mapped to 1 Self-rated health HSD010 1 (Excellent), 2 (Very good) or 3 (Good) mapped to 1; 4 (Fair) or 5 (Poor) mapped to 0 

NHANES-specific physical function items 

Participants were asked how much difficulty they had doing each activity by themselves and without using special equipment. Walk 1/4 mile PFQ061B 

1 (No difficulty), or responses skipped at 

PFQ059A after negative screening (ages 20–59), mapped to 0; 2 (Some difficulty), 3 (Much difficulty) or 4 (Unable to do) mapped to 1; skipped 

PFQ061B/C responses when PFQ054 = 1 also mapped to 1 Walk 10 steps PFQ061C 

Stoop/crouch/kneel PFQ061D 

Lift/carry PFQ061E 

House chores PFQ061F 

Prepare meals PFQ061G 

Walk between rooms PFQ061H 

Stand from chair PFQ061I 

Get in/out of bed PFQ061J 

Eat with utensils PFQ061K 

Dress self PFQ061L 

Stand long periods PFQ061M 

Sit long periods PFQ061N 

Reach overhead PFQ061O 

Grasp small objects PFQ061P 

Go out to events PFQ061Q 

Attend social events PFQ061R 

Leisure at home PFQ061S 

Push/pull objects PFQ061T 

13 2.2 Datasets for Human Activity Recognition 

Supplementary Table 8: Overview of the human activity recognition datasets used in this study. Subject and class counts and analysed durations refer to the curated analysis subsets rather than the complete source datasets. 

Dataset # Subjects # Classes Total wear time (h) Raw Hz Device Reference PAMAP2 8 8 4.5 100 Colibri IMU [4] RealWorld 15 8 17.9 50 LG G Watch R [5] WISDM 51 18 38.3 20 LG G Watch [6] CAPTURE-24 151 4 2444.1 100 Axivity AX3 [7] 

Supplementary Table 9: Class composition of the human activity recognition datasets used in this study. 

Counts indicate the number of 1-minute windows included in the analysis for each class; percentages are calculated within each dataset. 

Dataset Activity class Windows, 𝑛 Proportion (%) PAMAP2 lying down 64 13.2 sitting 63 13.0 standing 64 13.2 ironing 79 16.3 vacuum cleaning 61 12.6 walking 78 16.0 ascending stairs 41 8.4 descending stairs 36 7.4 RealWorld lying down 295 14.6 sitting 295 14.6 standing 292 14.5 walking 301 14.9 climbing up 262 13.0 climbing down 219 10.8 running 327 16.2 jumping 28 1.4 WISDM sitting 206 5.6 typing 203 5.5 writing 204 5.5 eating pasta 200 5.4 eating sandwich 197 5.4 eating chips 208 5.6 eating soup 203 5.5 drinking from cup 201 5.5 standing 204 5.5 brushing teeth 210 5.7 folding clothes 205 5.6 clapping 208 5.6 walking 209 5.7 stairs 201 5.5 jogging 206 5.6 dribbling basketball 206 5.6 kicking soccer ball 209 5.7 catch tennis ball 202 5.5 CAPTURE-24 sleep 113,067 40.1 sedentary 111,248 39.4 light 44,670 15.8 moderate-vigorous 13,062 4.6 

14 3 Evaluations 

3.1 Human activity recognition benchmarks 

We processed each human activity recognition (HAR) dataset using the dataset-specific parsing and quality-control procedures described by Yuan et al. [8]. The only change was that we segmented the recordings into 60-s windows with a 30-s stride. After data-quality filtering, the dataset characteristics and class distributions used in this study are reported in Tables 8 and 9, respectively. We compared Sensori with five methods: handcrafted features, MOMENT [9], Chronos-2 [10], Bio-PM [11], and Harnet [8]. For handcrafted features, MOMENT, Chronos-2, and Sensori, we applied a shared preprocessing pipeline. At each dataset’s native sampling frequency, the tri-axial accelerometer signal was low-pass filtered using an eighth-order Butterworth filter with a cutoff frequency of 5 Hz and downsampled to 10 Hz, leading to 600 time points per input window. For Bio-PM and Harnet, we used their publicly released preprocessing pipelines and pretrained checkpoints. All deep learning models were kept frozen during embedding extraction. 

Handcrafted features. Following Yuan et al. [8], we calculated 22 features from each 60-s window. These comprised the mean, standard deviation, and range of each accelerometer axis (nine features); the pairwise Pearson correlations between the 𝑥 -, 𝑦 -, and 𝑧 -axes (three features); and statistics of the acceleration magnitude, 

𝑚 𝑡 =√︃ 𝑥 2 

> 𝑡

+ 𝑦 2 

> 𝑡

+ 𝑧 2 

> 𝑡

. The magnitude-based statistics included its mean, standard deviation, range, median absolute deviation, mean absolute deviation from 1 g, skewness, and kurtosis (seven features). We additionally calculated the spectral entropy of the magnitude signal and the frequencies of the two highest local peaks in its Welch power spectral density estimate (three features), yielding 22 features in total. 

MOMENT. MOMENT [9] is a general-purpose pretrained foundation model for time-series analysis. We used the MOMENT-1-large model in its embedding mode, which accepts sequences of 512 time points and uses non-overlapping patches of eight samples. Because directly resampling each input window from 600 to 512 time points resulted in inferior performance in our analysis, we instead divided each window into two contiguous, patch-aligned segments of 304 and 296 time points. Each segment was left-padded to a length of 512, with a binary mask indicating the valid positions. The final embeddings were combined using a length-weighted mean, with weights of 304 /600 and 296 /600. 

Chronos-2. Chronos-2 [10] is a pretrained foundation model originally designed for time-series forecasting. We passed each tri-axial input window to the encoder as a trivariate series and averaged the resulting patch representations over the observed-signal patches and the three accelerometer axes, producing a 768-dimensional embedding for each window. 

Bio-PM. For Bio-PM [11], we used the authors’ publicly released implementation and model-specific prepro-cessing pipeline. We used the recommended settings: the checkpoint pretrained with a 50% masking rate and per-axis pooling. This produced a 1,023-dimensional embedding for each input window. 

Harnet. Harnet [8] is our previously developed human activity recognition model pretrained on UK Biobank. Although Harnet was originally designed for 30-s input windows of 30-Hz tri-axial accelerometer data, its con-volutional structure makes it straightforward to adapt to longer inputs. We therefore resampled each window to 30 Hz, fed the full 60-s input into the model in a single pass, and averaged the output over the temporal dimension to obtain a 1,024-dimensional embedding for each input window. 

Sensori. For Sensori, we extracted the output of the convolutional feature encoder before the projection heads and the transformer, producing a 512-dimensional embedding for each window. All features and embeddings were evaluated under the same participant-wise five-fold cross-validation protocol, in which all windows from a participant remained within the same fold. Within each outer training fold, we fitted a class-balanced 𝐿 2-penalised logistic-regression linear probe, selecting the regularisation parameter 𝐶 ∈{10 −4, 10 −3, . . . , 10 4 } by participant-wise inner cross-validation. Handcrafted features and Bio-PM embeddings were standardised using statistics calculated exclusively from the corresponding outer training fold. This accounts for the heterogeneous numerical scales of the handcrafted features and follows the released Bio-PM evaluation protocol. 15 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Macro F1 PAMAP2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Macro F1 RealWorld Handcrafted MOMENT Chronos-2 Bio-PM Harnet Sensori 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Macro F1 WISDM Handcrafted MOMENT Chronos-2 Bio-PM Harnet Sensori 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Macro F1 CAPTURE-24 

Structured (RealWorld) Lying down Sitting Standing Walking Climbing up Climbing down Running Jumping 

Structured (WISDM) Sitting Typing Writing Eating pasta Eating sandwich Eating chips Eating soup Drinking from cup Standing Brushing teeth Folding clothes Clapping Walking Stairs Jogging Dribbling basketball Kicking soccer ball Catch tennis ball 

abSupplementary Figure 6: Additional results of human activity recognition benchmarks. a , Macro-averaged F1 scores evaluated on PAMAP2, RealWorld, WISDM and CAPTURE-24. Bars and error bars show the mean and standard deviation across the five participant-grouped outer folds, respectively. b, UMAP visualisations of the Sensori embeddings for RealWorld and WISDM, coloured by activity class. 16 3.2 Evaluating day-level behavioural traits 

Supplementary Table 10: Definitions of device-measured behavioural traits. Large-scale cohort accelerometer data were collected under free-living conditions. To generate the labels for day-level behaviours, we used our previously developed packages [3, 12, 13] to acquire algorithm-derived behavioural traits at the day level. These traits comprised measures of physical activity, steps and sleep. 

Variable Definition Units 

Physical activity traits (biobankAccelerometerAnalysis [12]) Acceleration mean Mean wrist acceleration across all valid wear days. mg Acceleration s.d. Standard deviation of wrist acceleration across all valid wear days. mg Light duration Mean daily proportion of time in light-intensity activity (activity classifier). proportion Moderate-vigorous duration Mean daily proportion of time in moderate-to-vigorous activity. proportion Sedentary duration Mean daily proportion of time in sedentary behaviour. proportion Metabolic equivalent Mean metabolic equivalent of task (MET), from a per-class lookup applied to the activity classifier output. METs 

Step traits (stepcount [13]) Daily step count Mean daily step count, adjusted for missing wear time. steps/day Daily walk duration Mean daily time spent walking, adjusted for missing wear time. minutes/day Maximum daily cadence Mean of each day’s single highest 1-minute walking cadence, adjusted for missing wear time. steps/min Mean top-30 cadence Mean of each day’s cadence averaged over its 30 most active walking minutes, adjusted for missing wear time. steps/min 95th-percentile cadence Mean of each day’s 95th-percentile walking cadence, adjusted for missing wear time. steps/min 

Sleep traits (asleep [3]) Sleep onset latency Time from bedtime to sleep onset. minutes Total sleep time All sleep stages combined. minutes Wake after sleep onset Wake time occurring after sleep onset. minutes Sleep efficiency Total sleep time divided by time in bed. proportion Total Wake time during sleep Total wake time from bedtime to rise time. minutes Total NREM sleep duration Non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep duration (stages N1+N2+N3). minutes Total REM sleep duration Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep duration. minutes 

17 Supplementary Table 11: Prediction of device-measured behavioural traits. Values are Pearson’s 𝑟 with 95% CIs between the observed and predicted trait values. Within each cell, the first line presents the baseline model and the second line, shown in dark blue, presents Sensori. The baseline model included age, sex and BMI. CIs were estimated using 1,000 bootstrap resamples of participants. A dash indicates that the corresponding trait was unavailable. 

Trait Pearson’s 𝑟 (95% CI) UKB CKB ELSA NHANES 

Physical activity traits 

Acceleration mean 0.370 (0.356–0.384) 0.901 (0.878–0.920) 0.407 (0.383–0.432) 0.942 (0.930–0.951) 0.477 (0.453–0.501) 0.939 (0.931–0.946) 0.439 (0.418–0.458) 0.819 (0.807–0.830) Acceleration s.d. 0.381 (0.370–0.392) 0.741 (0.731–0.752) 0.316 (0.288–0.346) 0.814 (0.800–0.827) 0.469 (0.444–0.494) 0.818 (0.794–0.841) 0.376 (0.327–0.433) 0.439 (0.394–0.493) Light duration 0.292 (0.279–0.305) 0.951 (0.949–0.953) 0.341 (0.315–0.368) 0.926 (0.919–0.934) 0.282 (0.252–0.316) 0.945 (0.936–0.952) 0.223 (0.196–0.252) 0.900 (0.895–0.905) Moderate-vigorous duration 0.325 (0.314–0.338) 0.905 (0.899–0.909) 0.201 (0.170–0.235) 0.840 (0.825–0.855) 0.342 (0.320–0.367) 0.900 (0.890–0.908) 0.323 (0.299–0.347) 0.594 (0.568–0.619) Sedentary duration 0.329 (0.317–0.341) 0.939 (0.937–0.941) 0.292 (0.262–0.322) 0.943 (0.938–0.947) 0.340 (0.308–0.373) 0.928 (0.920–0.934) 0.263 (0.234–0.291) 0.836 (0.828–0.845) Metabolic equivalent 0.251 (0.239–0.263) 0.922 (0.919–0.926) 0.170 (0.136–0.205) 0.905 (0.896–0.914) 0.325 (0.298–0.353) 0.923 (0.917–0.929) 0.317 (0.293–0.342) 0.898 (0.891–0.905) 

Step traits 

Daily step count 0.281 (0.268–0.292) 0.936 (0.934–0.939) 0.194 (0.158–0.231) 0.938 (0.933–0.942) 0.391 (0.366–0.418) 0.952 (0.947–0.956) 0.399 (0.378–0.421) 0.907 (0.901–0.912) Daily walk duration 0.260 (0.247–0.274) 0.940 (0.937–0.942) 0.108 (0.075–0.145) 0.939 (0.935–0.943) 0.321 (0.292–0.349) 0.952 (0.948–0.956) 0.356 (0.333–0.380) 0.939 (0.935–0.942) Maximum daily cadence 0.351 (0.338–0.363) 0.754 (0.746–0.761) 0.312 (0.282–0.343) 0.751 (0.735–0.767) 0.402 (0.369–0.431) 0.797 (0.781–0.813) 0.385 (0.359–0.411) 0.701 (0.686–0.716) Mean top-30 cadence 0.300 (0.287–0.313) 0.815 (0.809–0.820) 0.247 (0.213–0.278) 0.834 (0.823–0.843) 0.413 (0.380–0.440) 0.855 (0.842–0.867) 0.420 (0.395–0.447) 0.789 (0.777–0.800) 95th-percentile cadence 0.293 (0.280–0.305) 0.774 (0.768–0.781) 0.214 (0.181–0.245) 0.779 (0.766–0.791) 0.384 (0.353–0.413) 0.800 (0.786–0.815) 0.361 (0.334–0.388) 0.677 (0.660–0.694) 

Sleep traits 

Sleep onset latency 0.081 (0.068–0.095) 0.381 (0.365–0.397) 0.076 (0.044–0.104) 0.432 (0.402–0.465) 0.089 (0.053–0.133) 0.397 (0.351–0.442) –Total sleep time 0.162 (0.148–0.176) 0.866 (0.861–0.871) 0.107 (0.075–0.136) 0.857 (0.848–0.866) 0.074 (0.036–0.112) 0.856 (0.843–0.869) –Wake after sleep onset 0.086 (0.072–0.100) 0.770 (0.763–0.777) 0.034 (0.001–0.067) 0.747 (0.734–0.761) 0.031 (-0.005–0.066) 0.736 (0.715–0.756) –Sleep efficiency 0.120 (0.105–0.134) 0.788 (0.781–0.794) 0.047 (0.015–0.079) 0.770 (0.756–0.783) 0.036 (-0.002–0.072) 0.772 (0.754–0.790) –Total wake time during sleep 0.089 (0.075–0.104) 0.777 (0.770–0.783) 0.017 (-0.016–0.051) 0.765 (0.752–0.779) 0.024 (-0.011–0.058) 0.750 (0.731–0.769) –Total NREM sleep duration 0.200 (0.186–0.213) 0.792 (0.786–0.798) 0.150 (0.120–0.181) 0.788 (0.776–0.800) 0.123 (0.086–0.162) 0.788 (0.772–0.803) –Total REM sleep duration 0.271 (0.258–0.285) 0.759 (0.752–0.765) 0.272 (0.243–0.298) 0.647 (0.628–0.666) 0.302 (0.269–0.334) 0.770 (0.753–0.785) –

18 3.3 Evaluating key demographic characteristics and multidimensional health axes 

Supplementary Table 12: Prediction of age, sex and BMI across cohorts. Within each cell, the first line presents the prediction results using the mean and standard deviation of acceleration, and the second line, shown in dark blue, presents Sensori. Values in parentheses are 95% bootstrap CIs. 

Cohort Sex (AUROC) Age (Pearson’s 𝑟 ) BMI (Pearson’s 𝑟 )

UKB 0.630 (0.622–0.638) 0.996 (0.995–0.997) 0.292 (0.279–0.305) 0.837 (0.833–0.841) 0.273 (0.260–0.285) 0.733 (0.725–0.740) CKB 0.636 (0.616–0.653) 0.969 (0.964–0.974) 0.393 (0.366–0.420) 0.765 (0.754–0.776) 0.092 (0.062–0.122) 0.511 (0.481–0.541) ELSA 0.600 (0.581–0.620) 0.988 (0.984–0.991) 0.427 (0.400–0.453) 0.846 (0.836–0.855) 0.283 (0.249–0.319) 0.710 (0.689–0.729) NHANES 0.535 (0.520–0.551) 0.976 (0.972–0.979) 0.386 (0.351–0.417) 0.677 (0.662–0.691) 0.221 (0.193–0.245) 0.596 (0.578–0.614) 

19 3.4 Prediction of multidimensional health axes 0.66 0.68 0.70 

a Long-standing illness 0.68 0.70 0.72 

Getting up easily 0.64 0.68 0.72 

Nap during day 0.61 0.63 0.65 

Sleeplessness 0.62 0.64 0.66 

Daytime dozing 1 2 3 4 5 60.60 0.61 0.62 

Mood swings 1 2 3 4 5 60.62 0.64 0.66 Tiredness/lethargy 1 2 3 4 5 60.70 0.72 0.74 Brisk walking pace 1 2 3 4 5 60.76 0.80 0.84 

Shortness of breath 1 2 3 4 5 60.65 0.70 0.75 

Happiness 0.00 0.03 0.06 

b Long-standing illness 0.00 0.04 0.08 Getting up easily 0.00 0.04 0.08 Nap during day 0.00 0.02 0.04 Sleeplessness 0.00 0.04 0.08 Daytime dozing 0.00 0.02 0.04 Mood swings 0.00 0.02 0.04 Tiredness/lethargy 0.00 0.02 0.04 Brisk walking pace 0.00 0.03 0.06 Shortness of breath 0.00 0.04 0.08 Happiness AUROC Number of input days AUROC gain compared with Acc mean/s.d. Device-measured daily traits Device-measured hourly traits Device-measured daily+hourly traits Embedding 

Supplementary Figure 7: Individual results for the ten UKB health axes. a , Multi-day analysis. b, Comparison with conventional device-measured traits. The analyses are identical to those in Fig. 4b and 4c in the main text, with the ten health axes shown separately. 20 3.5 Disease prediction 

For disease prediction, we applied supervised fine-tuning to enrich disease-related signals. To select the hyper-parameters and fine-tuning strategy, we used 40% of the UKB training set as a derivation set, split equally into participant-disjoint training and validation sets. To reduce computational cost, we froze the convolutional feature extractor and fine-tuned the linear projection, transformer blocks, and final readout layers. We evaluated three variants: disease-specific fine-tuning with pretrained weights, disease-specific fine-tuning with randomly initialised weights downstream of the feature encoder, and pretrained shared-organ fine-tuning. The multi-label shared-organ approach was designed to mitigate the extreme class imbalance associated with rare diseases by sharing supervision across diseases with related aetiologies (Table 13). Disease groupings followed CALIBER chapters. This approach also substantially reduced computation: rather than fitting 102 disease-specific models, only one model with six organ-level outputs was required, reducing fine-tuning compute by approximately 99%. Each day was treated as one observation during training. To prevent participants with more available days from dominating training, each day was assigned weight 𝑤 𝑖 𝑗 = 1/𝑛 𝑖 , where 𝑛 𝑖 is the number of days available for participant i. After fine-tuning, we regenerated day-level embeddings and averaged them across all available days to obtain participant-level representations for downstream linear probes. We report validation performance for six clinically relevant candidate diseases in Table 14. Shared-organ fine-tuning achieved the best overall performance and was therefore selected for the main analysis. Across all six candidate diseases, disease-specific fine-tuning with pretrained initialisation outperformed the corresponding random-initialisation control; the convolutional feature extractor was frozen in both variants. 21 Supplementary Table 13: Disease-level inclusion criteria for the UKB cohort. Prevalence: proportion of participants with a recorded event on or before the device-wear start date. Incident rate: proportion developing the condition within 6 years among participants without prevalent disease. 

Disease Prevalent Prev. Prev. Incident Inc. Inc. Cases N (%) Cases N Rate (%) 

Cardiovascular 

Hypertension 18,066 103,610 17.4 9,084 84,731 10.7 Coronary heart disease not otherwise specified 4,658 103,610 4.5 2,950 98,735 3.0 Stable angina 3,277 103,610 3.2 1,523 100,204 1.5 Atrial fibrillation 3,034 103,610 2.9 3,137 100,364 3.1 Myocardial infarction 2,272 103,610 2.2 968 101,261 1.0 Venous thromboembolic disease (Excl PE) 2,114 103,610 2.0 552 101,457 0.5 Transient ischaemic attack 1,139 103,610 1.1 729 102,409 0.7 Pulmonary embolism 1,022 103,610 1.0 767 102,554 0.7 Raynaud’s syndrome 992 103,610 1.0 320 102,591 0.3 Unstable Angina 992 103,610 1.0 288 102,593 0.3 Heart failure 808 103,610 0.8 1,420 102,729 1.4 Peripheral arterial disease 736 103,610 0.7 458 102,853 0.4 Supraventricular tachycardia 716 103,610 0.7 397 102,868 0.4 Nonrheumatic mitral valve disorders 574 103,610 0.6 674 102,998 0.7 Nonrheumatic aortic valve disorders 534 103,610 0.5 705 103,034 0.7 Ischaemic stroke 426 103,610 0.4 774 103,127 0.8 Right bundle branch block 348 103,610 0.3 597 103,227 0.6 Left bundle branch block 325 103,610 0.3 513 103,257 0.5 Multiple valve dz 271 103,610 0.3 878 103,308 0.8 Abdominal aortic aneurysm 238 103,610 0.2 339 103,350 0.3 Subarachnoid haemorrhage 224 103,610 0.2 91 103,373 0.1 Stroke NOS 211 103,610 0.2 116 103,389 0.1 Atrioventricular block, first degree 200 103,610 0.2 485 103,383 0.5 Other Cardiomyopathy 180 103,610 0.2 243 103,413 0.2 Pericardial effusion (noninflammatory) 179 103,610 0.2 217 103,419 0.2 Ventricular tachycardia 162 103,610 0.2 180 103,439 0.2 Intracerebral haemorrhage 142 103,610 0.1 165 103,459 0.2 Dilated cardiomyopathy 131 103,610 0.1 106 103,475 0.1 Rheumatic valve dz 130 103,610 0.1 221 103,473 0.2 Atrioventricular block, complete 106 103,610 0.1 220 103,496 0.2 Sick sinus syndrome 100 103,610 0.1 139 103,503 0.1 Atrioventricular block, second degree 94 103,610 0.1 155 103,512 0.1 Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy 87 103,610 0.1 65 103,518 0.1 Primary pulmonary hypertension 82 103,610 0.1 28 103,525 0.0 Subdural haematoma - nontraumatic 69 103,610 0.1 70 103,540 0.1 Secondary pulmonary hypertension 46 103,610 0.0 190 103,557 0.2 Trifascicular block 16 103,610 0.0 40 103,593 0.0 Bifascicular block 15 103,610 0.0 51 103,593 0.0 

Endocrine 

Hypo or hyperthyroidism 7,081 103,610 6.8 1,388 96,406 1.4 Hypothyroidism 6,317 103,610 6.1 1,285 97,180 1.3 Obesity 4,036 103,610 3.9 3,287 99,329 3.3 Diabetes Type II 3,671 103,610 3.5 2,281 99,735 2.3 Diabetes NOS 3,480 103,610 3.4 495 100,095 0.5 Hyperthyroidism 1,521 103,610 1.5 305 102,056 0.3 Diabetes Type I 477 103,610 0.5 178 103,121 0.2 Thyroiditis unspecified 303 103,610 0.3 75 103,302 0.1 Polycystic ovarian syndrome 292 103,610 0.3 13 103,318 0.0 

Continued on next page 

22 Supplementary Table 13 – continued 

Disease Prevalent Prev. Prev. Incident Inc. Inc. Cases N (%) Cases N Rate (%) Hyperparathyroidism 257 103,610 0.2 217 103,339 0.2 Cystic Fibrosis 28 103,610 0.0 0 103,582 0.0 Syndrome of inappropriate secretion of antidiuretic hormone 20 103,610 0.0 64 103,590 0.1 

Musculoskeletal 

Osteoarthritis (excl spine) 17,518 103,610 16.9 6,301 85,520 7.4 Enthesopathies & synovial disorders 14,486 103,610 14.0 2,184 88,752 2.5 Carpal tunnel syndrome 8,238 103,610 8.0 383 95,331 0.4 Intervertebral disc disorders 5,126 103,610 4.9 1,338 98,381 1.4 Spondylosis 4,081 103,610 3.9 1,564 99,403 1.6 Fracture of wrist 3,841 103,610 3.7 861 99,697 0.9 Osteoporosis 3,494 103,610 3.4 1,710 99,968 1.7 Gout 2,676 103,610 2.6 707 100,857 0.7 Fibromatoses 1,614 103,610 1.6 669 101,935 0.7 Rheumatoid Arthritis 1,446 103,610 1.4 586 102,115 0.6 Spinal stenosis 827 103,610 0.8 953 102,717 0.9 Polymyalgia Rheumatica 570 103,610 0.6 526 102,997 0.5 Spondylolisthesis 561 103,610 0.5 301 103,022 0.3 Scoliosis 537 103,610 0.5 341 103,050 0.3 Fracture of hip 495 103,610 0.5 523 103,093 0.5 Psoriatic arthropathy 373 103,610 0.4 91 103,230 0.1 Ankylosing spondylitis 365 103,610 0.4 47 103,239 0.0 Collapsed vertebra 291 103,610 0.3 226 103,308 0.2 Sjogren’s disease 213 103,610 0.2 104 103,387 0.1 Lupus erythematosus (local and systemic) 209 103,610 0.2 43 103,397 0.0 Giant Cell arteritis 108 103,610 0.1 128 103,492 0.1 Systemic sclerosis 59 103,610 0.1 25 103,550 0.0 Postinfective and reactive arthropathies 53 103,610 0.1 13 103,557 0.0 Juvenile arthritis 13 103,610 0.0 6 103,597 0.0 Enteropathic arthropathy 11 103,610 0.0 3 103,599 0.0 

Neurological 

Migraine 7,979 103,610 7.7 591 95,578 0.6 Postviral fatigue syndrome, neurasthenia and fibromyalgia 2,937 103,610 2.8 185 100,655 0.2 Peripheral neuropathies (excl. cranial nerve, carpal tunnel syndromes) 1,993 103,610 1.9 949 101,539 0.9 Epilepsy 1,014 103,610 1.0 253 102,575 0.2 Bell’s palsy 462 103,610 0.4 113 103,142 0.1 Multiple sclerosis 408 103,610 0.4 62 103,195 0.1 Trigeminal neuralgia 386 103,610 0.4 110 103,208 0.1 Parkinson’s disease 224 103,610 0.2 295 103,374 0.3 Essential tremor 207 103,610 0.2 102 103,394 0.1 Disorders of autonomic nervous system 132 103,610 0.1 68 103,477 0.1 Diabetic neurological complications 114 103,610 0.1 107 103,493 0.1 Myasthenia gravis 48 103,610 0.0 31 103,560 0.0 Cerebral Palsy 32 103,610 0.0 5 103,578 0.0 Motor neuron disease 30 103,610 0.0 66 103,577 0.1 Intracranial hypertension 21 103,610 0.0 7 103,589 0.0 

Psychiatric 

Depression 48,019 103,610 46.3 531 55,565 1.0 Anxiety disorders 26,380 103,610 25.5 1,134 77,161 1.5 Alcohol Problems 1,876 103,610 1.8 831 101,553 0.8 Bipolar affective disorder and mania 611 103,610 0.6 55 102,993 0.1 

Continued on next page 

23 Supplementary Table 13 – continued 

Disease Prevalent Prev. Prev. Incident Inc. Inc. Cases N (%) Cases N Rate (%) Obsessive-compulsive disorder 505 103,610 0.5 11 103,104 0.0 Anorexia and bulimia nervosa 201 103,610 0.2 7 103,409 0.0 Other psychoactive substance misuse 168 103,610 0.2 56 103,434 0.1 Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders 165 103,610 0.2 58 103,440 0.1 Personality disorders 116 103,610 0.1 20 103,493 0.0 Autism and Asperger’s syndrome 91 103,610 0.1 12 103,518 0.0 Dementia 52 103,610 0.1 466 103,552 0.5 Alzheimer’s disease 33 103,610 0.0 197 103,572 0.2 Delirium, not induced by alcohol and other psychoactive substances 33 103,610 0.0 597 103,564 0.6 Dementia (excluding Alzheimer’s) 24 103,610 0.0 343 103,583 0.3 Intellectual disability 11 103,610 0.0 11 103,598 0.0 Hyperkinetic disorders 2 103,610 0.0 6 103,607 0.0 

Respiratory 

Allergic and chronic rhinitis 30,298 103,610 29.2 632 73,206 0.9 Asthma 14,959 103,610 14.4 983 88,558 1.1 Chronic sinusitis 7,052 103,610 6.8 456 96,471 0.5 COPD 2,126 103,610 2.1 1,363 101,391 1.3 COPD_excl_bronchitis_NOS 2,047 103,610 2.0 1,323 101,478 1.3 Nasal polyp 1,740 103,610 1.7 174 101,847 0.2 Sleep apnoea 1,341 103,610 1.3 683 102,213 0.7 Bronchiectasis 806 103,610 0.8 487 102,770 0.5 Pleural effusion 674 103,610 0.7 1,512 102,873 1.5 Pneumothorax 479 103,610 0.5 200 103,123 0.2 Hypertrophy of nasal turbinates 433 103,610 0.4 71 103,162 0.1 Pulmonary collapse (excl pneumothorax) 278 103,610 0.3 933 103,291 0.9 Other interstitial pulmonary diseases with fibrosis 189 103,610 0.2 289 103,412 0.3 Respiratory failure 172 103,610 0.2 727 103,412 0.7 Pleural plaque 106 103,610 0.1 193 103,495 0.2 Asbestosis 47 103,610 0.0 37 103,562 0.0 Aspiration pneumonitis 39 103,610 0.0 257 103,557 0.2 

24 Supplementary Table 14: Supervised fine-tuning model performance. Participant-level logistic-probe AUROC results on the fixed pilot validation set. Initial convolutional blocks were frozen for all models. Only layers downstream of the feature extractor were fine-tuned. 

Pretrained initialisation Random init. after Conv Organ system Disease Cases, 𝑛 Disease-specific Shared six-organ Disease-specific Cardiovascular Hypertension 2,580 0.742 0.743 0.730 Endocrine Type 2 diabetes 510 0.822 0.829 0.793 Musculoskeletal Osteoarthritis 2,439 0.698 0.698 0.685 Neurological Migraine 1,118 0.632 0.638 0.625 Psychiatric Depression 6,966 0.627 0.630 0.608 Respiratory Asthma 2,152 0.622 0.615 0.598 Average – – 0.691 0.692 0.673 

25 Heart failure Hypertension COPD COPD excl bronchitis NOS Respiratory failure Sleep apnoea Diabetes NOS Diabetes Type II Enthesopathies & synovial disorders Intervertebral disc disorders Osteoarthritis (excl spine) Spondylolisthesis Spondylosis Essential tremor Parkinson's disease Peripheral neuropathies (excl. cranial nerve, carpal tunnel syndromes) Alcohol Problems Anxiety disorders Depression Abdominal aortic aneurysm Atrial fi brillation Coronary heart disease not otherwise speci fi ed Ischaemic stroke Myocardial infarction Nonrheumatic aortic valve disorders Peripheral arterial disease Raynaud's syndrome Stable angina Unstable Angina Venous thromboembolic disease (Excl PE) Allergic and chronic rhinitis Asthma Chronic sinusitis Diabetes Type I Carpal tunnel syndrome Fracture of hip Giant Cell arteritis Gout Psoriatic arthropathy Rheumatoid Arthritis Scoliosis Epilepsy Migraine Postviral fatigue syndrome, neurasthenia and fi bromyalgia Multiple valve dz Sick sinus syndrome Spinal stenosis Atrioventricular block, complete Atrioventricular block, fi rst degree Atrioventricular block, second degree Intracerebral haemorrhage Left bundle branch block Nonrheumatic mitral valve disorders Other Cardiomyopathy Pericardial e ff usion (nonin fl ammatory) Pulmonary embolism Rheumatic valve dz Right bundle branch block Stroke NOS Supraventricular tachycardia Transient ischaemic attack Ventricular tachycardia Bronchiectasis Nasal polyp Other interstitial pulmonary diseases with fi brosis Pleural e ff usion Pleural plaque Pneumothorax Pulmonary collapse (excl pneumothorax) Hyperparathyroidism Hyperthyroidism Hypo or hyperthyroidism Hypothyroidism Obesity Collapsed vertebra Fibromatoses Fracture of wrist Osteoporosis Polymyalgia Rheumatica Sjogren's disease Trigeminal neuralgia 

Improvement in both (n = 19) 

CARDIOVASCULAR RESPIRATORY ENDOCRINE MUSCULOSKELETAL NEUROLOGICAL PSYCHIATRIC 

Prevalent disease classi fi cation only (n = 25) 

CARDIOVASCULAR RESPIRATORY ENDOCRINE MUSCULOSKELETAL NEUROLOGICAL 

Incident disease risk prediction only (n = 3) 

CARDIOVASCULAR MUSCULOSKELETAL 

Neither (n = 34) 

CARDIOVASCULAR RESPIRATORY ENDOCRINE MUSCULOSKELETAL NEUROLOGICAL 

Prevalent disease classi fi cation improvement paired 95% CI lower bound for ΔAUROC > 0 Incident disease risk prediction improvement paired 95% CI lower bound for ΔUno C > 0 Supplementary Figure 8: Overlap in positive performance differences across disease prediction tasks. Over-lap between diseases for which adding Sensori embeddings to the clinical covariate model yielded a positive performance difference in prevalent disease classification (delta AUROC > 0) and six-year incident disease risk prediction (delta Uno’s C-index > 0). 26 Obesity Polycystic ovarian syndrome Diabetes Type II Diabetes NOS Diabetes Type I Hypothyroidism Hypo or hyperthyroidism Hyperthyroidism Hyperparathyroidism Thyroiditis unspeci fi ed Parkinson's disease Diabetic neurological complications Multiple sclerosis Essential tremor Postviral fatigue syndrome, neurasthenia and  fi bromyalgia Epilepsy Migraine Disorders of autonomic nervous system Peripheral neuropathies (excl. cranial nerve, carpal tunnel syndromes) Trigeminal neuralgia Bell's palsy COPD_excl_bronchitis_NOS COPD Sleep apnoea Pleural plaque Other interstitial pulmonary diseases with  fi brosis Respiratory failure Pneumothorax Bronchiectasis Pleural e ff usion Hypertrophy of nasal turbinates Pulmonary collapse (excl pneumothorax) Asthma Nasal polyp Allergic and chronic rhinitis Chronic sinusitis Abdominal aortic aneurysm Myocardial infarction Unstable Angina Heart failure Ischaemic stroke Stable angina Coronary heart disease not otherwise speci fi ed Atrial  fi brillation Atrioventricular block,  fi rst degree Nonrheumatic aortic valve disorders Peripheral arterial disease Hypertension Stroke NOS Transient ischaemic attack Dilated cardiomyopathy 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 

> AUROC

Endocrine Neurological Respiratory Cardiovascular 

> Multiple valve dz Right bundle branch block Intracerebral haemorrhage Venous thromboembolic disease (Excl PE) Rheumatic valve dz Atrioventricular block, complete Other Cardiomyopathy Nonrheumatic mitral valve disorders Left bundle branch block Sick sinus syndrome Raynaud's syndrome Pericardial e ff usion (nonin fl ammatory) Atrioventricular block, second degree Pulmonary embolism Ventricular tachycardia Primary pulmonary hypertension Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy Supraventricular tachycardia Subarachnoid haemorrhage Subdural haematoma - nontraumatic Anorexia and bulimia nervosa Schizophrenia, schizotypal and delusional disorders Other psychoactive substance misuse Bipolar a ff ective disorder and mania Alcohol Problems Autism and Asperger's syndrome Obsessive-compulsive disorder Personality disorders Anxiety disorders Depression Gout Osteoporosis Spondylolisthesis Rheumatoid Arthritis Giant Cell arteritis Spinal stenosis Polymyalgia Rheumatica Sjogren's disease Osteoarthritis (excl spine) Fibromatoses Scoliosis Spondylosis Fracture of hip Carpal tunnel syndrome Psoriatic arthropathy Collapsed vertebra Ankylosing spondylitis Intervertebral disc disorders Lupus erythematosus (local and systemic) Fracture of wrist Enthesopathies & synovial disorders

0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 

> AUROC

Cardiovascular Psychiatric Musculoskeletal 

Clinical Clinical + acc mean/std Clinical + all device traits Clinical + fi ne-tuned embeddings Supplementary Figure 9: Comparison of prevalent disease classification performance. Performance was compared across four models using AUROC: the clinical covariate model alone, the clinical covariate model with acceleration statistics, the clinical covariate model with conventional device-measured behavioural traits and the clinical covariate model with Sensori embeddings. Error bars show 95% CIs in the UKB held-out test set. 27 Obesity Diabetes Type II Diabetes NOS Hypothyroidism Hyperparathyroidism Diabetes Type I Hypo or hyperthyroidism Hyperthyroidism Parkinson's disease Essential tremor Epilepsy Postviral fatigue syndrome, neurasthenia and  fi bromyalgia Peripheral neuropathies (excl. cranial nerve, carpal tunnel syndromes) Trigeminal neuralgia Migraine Pleural plaque Aspiration pneumonitis COPD COPD_excl_bronchitis_NOS Respiratory failure Sleep apnoea Other interstitial pulmonary diseases with  fi brosis Bronchiectasis Pleural e ff usion Pulmonary collapse (excl pneumothorax) Pneumothorax Nasal polyp Allergic and chronic rhinitis Asthma Chronic sinusitis Abdominal aortic aneurysm Heart failure Atrioventricular block, complete Multiple valve dz Ventricular tachycardia Secondary pulmonary hypertension Nonrheumatic aortic valve disorders Peripheral arterial disease Atrioventricular block,  fi rst degree Left bundle branch block Atrial  fi brillation Coronary heart disease not otherwise speci fi ed Ischaemic stroke Right bundle branch block 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 

> Uno C

Endocrine Neurological Respiratory Cardiovascular 

> Nonrheumatic mitral valve disorders Hypertension Stable angina Atrioventricular block, second degree Transient ischaemic attack Stroke NOS Other Cardiomyopathy Pericardial e ff usion (nonin fl ammatory) Myocardial infarction Rheumatic valve dz Pulmonary embolism Intracerebral haemorrhage Sick sinus syndrome Unstable Angina Venous thromboembolic disease (Excl PE) Raynaud's syndrome Supraventricular tachycardia Dementia (excluding Alzheimer's) Delirium, not induced by alcohol and other psychoactive substances Dementia Alzheimer's disease Alcohol Problems Depression Anxiety disorders Scoliosis Spondylolisthesis Gout Osteoporosis Fracture of hip Spinal stenosis Collapsed vertebra Giant Cell arteritis Spondylosis Osteoarthritis (excl spine) Sjogren's disease Polymyalgia Rheumatica Fracture of wrist Intervertebral disc disorders Rheumatoid Arthritis Fibromatoses Carpal tunnel syndrome Enthesopathies & synovial disorders Psoriatic arthropathy

0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 

> Uno C

Cardiovascular Psychiatric Musculoskeletal 

Clinical Clinical + acc mean/std Clinical + all device traits Clinical + fi ne-tuned embeddings Supplementary Figure 10: Comparison of incident disease risk prediction performance. Performance was compared across four models using Uno’s C-index: the clinical covariate model alone, the clinical covariate model with acceleration statistics, the clinical covariate model with conventional device-measured behavioural traits and the clinical covariate model with Sensori embeddings. Error bars show 95% CIs in the UKB held-out test set. 28 Supplementary Table 15: Paired-bootstrap comparison of clinical covariates plus fine-tuned Sensori embed-dings against alternative feature models for disease prediction. 

Comparator delta mean (median) Improved 

𝑛 (%) Worsened 

𝑛 (%) Insignificant 

𝑛 (%) 

a, Prevalent disease classification (delta AUROC) 

Clinical 0.044 (0.036) 52 (51.0) 3 (2.9) 47 (46.1) Clinical + Acc mean/s.d. 0.031 (0.026) 47 (46.1) 4 (3.9) 51 (50.0) Clinical + 18 device-measured behavioural traits 0.028 (0.022) 47 (46.1) 2 (2.0) 53 (52.0) 

b, Incident disease risk prediction (delta Uno’s C-index) 

Clinical 0.027 (0.021) 26 (29.9) 0 (0.0) 61 (70.1) Clinical + Acc mean/s.d. 0.021 (0.015) 23 (26.4) 0 (0.0) 64 (73.6) Clinical + 18 device-measured behavioural traits 0.021 (0.014) 22 (25.3) 0 (0.0) 65 (74.7) 

29 References 

[1] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: pre-training of deep bidirec-tional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) , pages 4171–4186, 2019. [2] Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: a framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems ,volume 33, pages 12449–12460, 2020. [3] Hang Yuan, Tatiana Plekhanova, Rosemary Walmsley, Amy C Reynolds, Kathleen J Maddison, Maja Bu-can, Philip Gehrman, Alex Rowlands, David W Ray, Derrick Bennett, et al. Self-supervised learning of accelerometer data provides new insights for sleep and its association with mortality. npj Digital Medicine ,7(1):86, 2024. [4] Attila Reiss and Didier Stricker. Introducing a new benchmarked dataset for activity monitoring. In 2012 16th International Symposium on Wearable Computers , pages 108–109. IEEE, 2012. [5] Timo Sztyler and Heiner Stuckenschmidt. On-body localization of wearable devices: an investigation of position-aware activity recognition. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communications (PerCom) , pages 1–9. IEEE, 2016. [6] Gary M. Weiss. WISDM smartphone and smartwatch activity and biometrics dataset, 2019. [7] Shing Chan, Yuan Hang, Catherine Tong, Aidan Acquah, Abram Schonfeldt, Jonathan Gershuny, and Aiden Doherty. CAPTURE-24: a large dataset of wrist-worn activity tracker data collected in the wild for human activity recognition. Scientific Data , 11:1135, 2024. [8] Hang Yuan, Shing Chan, Andrew P Creagh, Catherine Tong, Aidan Acquah, David A Clifton, and Aiden Doherty. Self-supervised learning for human activity recognition using 700,000 person-days of wearable data. npj Digital Medicine , 7(1):91, 2024. [9] Mononito Goswami, Konrad Szafer, Arjun Choudhry, Yifu Cai, Shuo Li, and Artur Dubrawski. MOMENT: a family of open time-series foundation models. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 16115–16152. PMLR, 2024. [10] Abdul Fatir Ansari, Oleksandr Shchur, Jaris Küken, Andreas Auer, Boran Han, Pedro Mercado, Syama Sundar Rangapuram, Huibin Shen, Lorenzo Stella, Xiyuan Zhang, et al. Chronos-2: from univariate to universal forecasting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.15821 , 2025. [11] Prithviraj Tarale, Kiet Chu, Abhishek Varghese, Kai-Chun Liu, Maxwell A Xu, Mohit Iyyer, and Sunghoon I Lee. Bio-inspired self-supervised learning for wrist-worn accelerometer data. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 2026. [12] Aiden Doherty, Shing Chan, Hang Yuan, and Rosemary Walmsley. accelerometer: A python toolkit for extracting physical activity and behavior metrics from wearable sensor data, 2020. [13] Scott R Small, Shing Chan, Rosemary Walmsley, Lennart von Fritsch, Aidan Acquah, Gert Mertes, Ben-jamin G Feakins, Andrew Creagh, Adam Strange, Charles E Matthews, et al. Self-supervised machine learning to characterize step counts from wrist-worn accelerometers in the UK Biobank. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise , 56(10):1945, 2024. 30